What are Armpit Lumps?
A lump in the armpit is a swelling or bump under the arm. The size of these lumps can vary from large to small. Some lumps may feel soft to touch and some hard. These lumps are often accompanied by pain, redness and inflammation. Fortunately, these lumps can be treated, but it is important to find out the cause of armpit lumps first.
Advertisement
What are the Causes of Armpit Lumps?
Viral, fungal or bacterial infections
Fatty growths (lipomas)
Lymphoma
Breast cancer
Allergic reactions
Cysts
If the underlying cause of the armpit lump is cancer, it is advisable to consult a doctor immediately. If an infection or fatty growth is the cause of the lump, it can be easily treated at home. Let's have a look at 10 amazing home remedies to treat armpit lumps.
Home Remedies for Armpit Lumps
1. Warm Compress
When heat is applied to the skin externally, the blood vessels open up and promote the flow of oxygen and nutrient-rich blood towards the armpit. Such a natural action of the body reduces pain, helps in decreasing the size of the lump and enhances the removal of toxins and other waste products.
For this simple procedure, all you need is:
A clean towel
Warm water
Soak the towel in the warm water. Squeeze the towel and remove all the excess water.
Now place this warm towel on the affected armpit for 5-10 minutes. Repeat this procedure 2-3 times per day.
Advertisement
2. Vitamin E Supplements
Vitamin E is a natural antioxidant that reduces inflammation and pain. It suppresses the production of pro-inflammatory compounds and enhances the anti-inflammatory properties. Such an action of vitamin E helps in quick healing. Taking a vitamin E supplement, daily may help.
3. Turmeric
Turmeric is a natural antiseptic, anti-inflammatory and antioxidant. Turmeric paste, when applied topically on the armpit lumps, can reduce the size of the lumps as well as pain.
Curcumin is the active component of turmeric. It helps fight infections and gets rid of bacteria.
All you need to do is mix one teaspoon turmeric with water to form a smooth paste. Apply this paste on the affected area and allow it to dry. Repeat this twice a day.
4. Gentle Massage
An oil massage around the affected area is beneficial. Massage dilates the blood vessels and improves the overall blood flow.
Besides this, adding herbs to the oil can further enhance healing. During an oil massage, the active components from the herbal oil enter into the skin, which can improve the overall condition. Always use fresh herbs like neem, sage, turmeric and chickweed.
5. Lemon Juice
Lemon juice is a great source of vitamin C. Application of diluted lemon juice on the lumps can reduce pain, swelling and inflammation.
Lemon juice contains vitamin C, which is a powerful anti-inflammatory and anti-bacterial agent. An Irritation or allergic reaction to a skin product can cause the growth of lumps in the armpit.
Vitamin C has the ability to heal the skin and can reduce irritation too. Individuals with such lumps can even benefit from drinking lemon juice shots daily.
6. Watermelon
Watermelon is a natural blood purifier. It helps in removing toxins and other pain-causing chemicals from the blood.
The anti-inflammatory potential of watermelon is attributed to the presence of lycopene in it. Lycopene, a healthy compound reduces the synthesis of inflammatory mediators and modulates inflammatory pathways.
Such an action of watermelon relieves pain and swelling. Hence, individuals with armpit lumps must make fresh watermelon a part of their daily diet.
7. Apple Cider Vinegar
Apple cider vinegar is an antiseptic and anti-bacterial agent. It inhibits the growth and multiplication of harmful bacteria and reduces swelling.
To get rid of armpit lumps, mix together equal amounts of water and apple cider vinegar. Soak a cotton ball in this solution and apply to the affected area.
Leave it for 5 minutes and rinse it off with warm water. Pat it dry with a clean towel.
8. Garlic
Make garlic a part of your daily diet for a healthy body. The anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial properties of garlic can help in healing the armpit lumps.
Garlic has salicylic acid, which boosts the circulation of blood and brings down swelling. Allicin, a compound present in garlic reduces inflammation and swelling and thus, helps in treating armpit lumps.
Advertisement
9. Aloe Vera
Aloe Vera is a natural armpit lump soother. The anti-inflammatory and healing properties of aloe vera are attributed to the presence of auxin and gibberellins in it. These two hormones block the action of the pro-inflammatory compounds and stimulate healing.
How to use Aloe Vera gel?
Extract fresh gel from the aloe vera leaf. Apply this gel on the lump and gently massage in a circular motion.
Allow it to dry and then wash it off. Repeat this twice a day for best results.
10. Charcoal Compress
Activated charcoal has the ability to remove toxins from the body, clear out bacterial infections and purify the blood. Such an action of activated charcoal can reduce pain as well as the size of the armpit lumps.
How to use a charcoal compress?
Mix one teaspoon activated charcoal, half teaspoon flaxseed powder and water to form a smooth paste.
Put this paste on a clean paper towel and apply it on the affected area. Leave it for 15-20 minutes.
For effective results, repeat it every 2-3 hours.