What is Appendicitis?
Appendicitis is a condition in which the appendix becomes inflamed, painful and filled with pus. The appendix is a small finger-shaped structure that extends from the large intestine and it is on the right side of the abdomen. This small structure contains specialized tissue that can produce antibodies but has no essential purpose. However, it can lead to dangerous and even life threatening condition if its inflammation is left untreated. Appendicitis can affect anyone, but it often occurs in people between the ages of 10 and 30 years (1✔



).
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
What are the Causes of Appendicitis?
The common cause of appendicitis is the blockage of the appendiceal lumen. This may be due to some hard stools that have gotten trapped in the appendix which makes the bacteria in the trapped stool infect the appendix. Appendicitis is caused by food waste or a hard piece of stool that can block the opening of the cavity running the length of the appendix. Appendicitis may also occur after an infection such as gastrointestinal viral infection, or it may result from other types of inflammation. Carcinoid tumors, intestinal parasites, appendiceal carcinoma, and lymphoid hyperplasia are the common causes of appendiceal obstruction and appendicitis (1✔



).
Symptoms of Appendicitis
The following are the common symptoms of appendicitis:
Sharp pain in lower right abdomen Coughing or sneezing increases abdominal pain
Nausea
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Inability to pass gas (break wind, fart)
Fever
Constipation
Loss of appetite
Painful urination (1✔



)
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Appendicitis
Here are some natural and herbal home remedies which may help in curing appendicitis.
Drinking plenty of water throughout the day is essential for a healthy appendix(1✔



) .
Ginseng has anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant properties. Prepare a cup of ginseng tea and have it twice daily, as it may help reduce the pain and inflammation of the appendix (2✔



).
Mint may help to relieve the pain caused by appendicitis. Add 2 to 3 drops of mint essence to water and drink once every 3 to 4 hours.
Constipation may lead to inflammation of the appendix. Having a high-fiber diet full of fruits and green leafy vegetables may help to avoid this condition (3✔



).
Advertisement
Buttermilk may prove effective in preventing the bacterial growth in the appendix.
Mix 100ml each of cucumber and beet juices in 300ml of carrot juice and drink it twice in a day daily for better metabolism.
A decoction of basil leaves (Tulsi) can be given if the appendicitis patient suffers from fever as tulsi has anti pyretic property (4✔



).
Drink tea made from fenugreek seeds on a daily basis to prevent the accumulation of intestinal waste and excess mucus. Fenugreek may help in relieving constipation due to its high fiber content therefore it may be beneficial in treating appendicitis (5✔



).