What is High Blood Pressure?
High blood pressure (hypertension), often called a silent killer is the pressure of the blood in the arteries. Blood pressure is typically recorded as the systolic pressure (as the heart beats) over the diastolic pressure (time between two beats). A consistent blood pressure reading of 140/90 mm Hg or higher is considered high blood pressure. Untreated, high blood pressure will cause heart attacks, strokes, kidney failure, injury to the brain and eyes.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Common Causes of High Blood Pressure
Obesity
Lifestyle
Genetic factors
Excessive alcohol
Birth control pills
Pain relievers
Other underlying causes may include:
Kidney diseases
Adrenal diseases
Abnormal blood vessels
Eclampsia / Pre-eclampsia in pregnant women
Thyroid diseases
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for High Blood Pressure
Food or herbal supplements may help control mild to moderate blood pressure. The supplements can be considered along with medication for blood pressure control. While herbs are not a substitute to tablets but can help reduce the dose of the blood pressure tablets.
Following food or herbal supplements have some evidence of their effect on blood pressure. However we do suggest that you consult your doctor before combining them with your tablets (1✔



).
Celery Leaves to Lower High Blood Pressure
Celery contains high levels of 3-N-butylphthalide, a kind of photochemical that may help in controlling high blood pressure (2✔



). You can eat a few stalks of celery as a simple snack daily.
Carrots, Spinach and Parsley to Keep Blood Pressure Under Control
Vegetables such as carrots, spinach and parsley play a role in lowering blood pressure. Both spinach and parsley are high in nitrates. Studies have shown that dietary nitrate reduces arterial stiffness and controls central blood pressure (3✔



). Another study reported that carrot juice contributes to a 5% reduction in systolic blood pressure (4✔



). Drink a glass of juice made of these vegetables twice a day to help reduce your blood pressure.
Indian Gooseberry or Amla May help Reduce Blood Pressure
Emblica officinalis Gaertn (EO) or amla (family Euphorbiaceae) is a medium-sized tree, native to India, and is cultivated in Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia, China, and Malaysia. Its other names are Phyllanthus emblica Linn, Emblica pectinata Ridl, emblic myrobalan, and Indian gooseberry (5✔



).
Indian gooseberry (Amla) in trials that included placebo was shown to be helpful in reducing and maintaining blood pressure (6✔



). Mix 1 tablespoon of fresh amla juice with an equal amount of honey. Take this mixture daily in the morning before your breakfast.
Grapefruit Helps Tone the Blood Vessels
Grapefruit is another home remedy for preventing rise in blood pressure (7✔



). The vitamin, minerals and plant compounds in the grapefruit may help to keep your heart healthy by reducing high blood pressure and reducing the tone of the blood vessels (8✔



).
Potato Diet Helps Lower Blood Pressure
Boiled potatoes can help lower the blood pressure (9✔



). Potatoes are rich in both glycemic carbohydrates and potassium and hence have been recommended for lowering the blood pressure (10✔



).
Garlic to Control High Blood Pressure
A clove of garlic has shown effectiveness in reducing high blood pressure (11✔



). Garlic improves cardiovascular health by reducing arterial stiffness, controlling cholesterol level and blood clotting or stickiness (12✔



). Consuming one to two cloves of garlic daily with your meals is hence recommended for blood pressure control.
Ginger Juice with Honey and Cumin Powder for High Blood Pressure
Ginger supplementation may help to keep blood pressure in control (13✔



). Ginger reduces blood pressure by dilating the blood vessels and acting as a calcium channel blocker (14✔



). Make a mixture of 1 teaspoon each of honey and ginger juice with 1 teaspoon of cumin powder, stir well and consume this mixture twice a day for treating high blood pressure.
Watermelon Seeds: Natural Remedy for High Blood Pressure
Watermelon seeds are also a good remedy for blood pressure.The potassium content in the watermelon helps in lowering blood pressure (15✔



).
Take some dry roasted seeds and grind them up. Add the powder to 2 cups of water and boil for about 15 minutes. Strain the liquid and consume daily in the morning and evening.