What is Broken Tooth?
Is a crack in your tooth causing pain? Well, it is common to break, chip or knock out a tooth after eating something hard, or after a blow to the face.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
A broken tooth may occur due to several reasons:
Extreme tooth grinding
Large fillings or biting of something hard such as ice, fruit stones, boiled sweets, meat bones
A blow to the chin or lower jaw
Gum disease, bone loss
Sudden changes in the temperature of the mouth
Extreme temperatures, especially cold may cause discomfort. Your tooth may become sensitive to sweet. Also, a small area of the gum near the affected tooth may swell.
Causes of Tooth Pain
Tooth pain occurs due to various causes including tooth decay or cavities, abscesses, broken or damaged teeth, sinus infections and gum disease. Beneath the white enamel of the tooth, lies the dentin which is a hard layer. Beneath this, the soft inner tissue known as pulp is found, which is innervated by nerves and blood vessels of the tooth.
In a broken tooth, the outer hard tissues are cracked and movement such as chewing can lead to the movement of the pieces which irritates the pulp. This leads to a damage of the pulp and it cannot heal on its own. The tooth hurts while chewing and it also becomes temporarily sensitive.
Advertisement
Disclaimer:The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Tooth Aches
Lime is a home remedy for toothache and may help promote the general health of the teeth.
· Garlic and clove oil can be placed on the affected tooth to alleviate tooth pain.
A garlic clove can be kept directly on the chipped tooth to reduce pain (1✔



).
A mixture of vinegar and bayberry can be applied for relief
Asafoetida can be applied directly to the gums to improve its overall health (2✔



).
Home Remedies for Tooth Infection Pain
Oral infections are causative factors of the dental distress and they should neither be underestimated nor overlooked.
Calendula petals have also been used to cure toothache (3✔



).
The antiseptic properties of clove oil have made it one of the most popular home remedies for tooth infection pain. It numbs the affected teeth and gums thus relieving the pain (4✔



).
Slippery elm powder is another herbal remedy which can be used as a mouthwash and antiseptic. The powder is made into a solution by dissolving in water and can be used as a mouthwash.
Babool tree bark is an Ayurvedic herbal home remedy which may take care of the pain. It is also used to stop any bleeding in the tooth.
Cider vinegar has antiseptic properties and is used as an herbal remedy for pain in infected teeth. It is diluted and used as a mouthwash to mimic the functions of saliva in promoting healing and removing the source of infection.
Sage and Myrrh are also antiseptic agents which provide natural pain relief by acting as numbing agents.
How to Fix a Broken Tooth at Home?
Do not handle the tooth by its root. Avoid touching the root and hold the tooth from its crown.
Do not brush or scrape the broken tooth.
In case the broken tooth is dirty, rinse it with milk or a saline solution and keep it back into its socket in your mouth at the earliest.
Do not use water or alcohol to rinse the tooth.
Fix broken tooth at home by biting down on a clean material such as cloth or a wet tea bag to hold it in place.
If you don’t know how to fix a broken tooth yourself, hold the tooth between your cheek and gums till you see a dentist. Alternatively, you can keep the tooth in a clean container covered in milk or your saliva.
How to Fix Chipped Tooth at Home?
Chipped tooth repair at home is possible, but you must see the dentist as there may be complications associated with the chipped tooth.
Take care of the wound immediately. A cold compress ice pack should be used immediately to alleviate any inflammation. If the pain is unbearable, pain killers such as paracetamol should be taken.
If a small part is chipped off or just a corner of the tooth is broken, then use the emery board to slightly file down the tooth to improve the look. This will also prevent further damage to the chipped tooth. More than one filing may be needed to improve the appearance of the tooth but be careful to avoid removing too much of your teeth.
Try to avoid chewing from that side of the mouth where the chipped tooth is present. Use foods that are soft in nature, low in sugar, and of neutral temperatures such as plain yogurt, soft bread or soup.
Prevent Teeth Cracking
It is not possible to completely prevent cracking teeth, but some precautions can be taken such as:
Wear a mouthguard
Avoid biting or chewing on hard things