What is Corn?
A corn is a localized thickening of the skin due to pressure. Corns may occur on the top of the toes, at the sole of the foot and in between toes. Corns can be very painful, especially if there is inflammation and swelling around the corn. The corns may appear as white, gray, yellow and brown in color depending on your skin type.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Corns
Increased skin pressure
Stress in specific locations
Tight shoes
Deformed toes
Rubbing of the toe against the stitch inside the shoe
Way of walking
Home Remedies for Corns
Tip 1:
Chalk, powdered and made into a paste by adding water, is very effective when applied on corn at bedtime.
Tip 2:
Liquorice powdered and mixed with either mustard or sesame oil (Gingili oil) to make a paste should be applied on the corns 2-3 times a day.
Tip 3:
Pumice stones are useful for treating corns. Pumice is nothing but rough volcanic mineral stone. Rub this pumice stone on wet and moist feet after having a warm bath. This will eventually wear off the dead cells present in the affected area.
Tip 4:
Castor oil is an age-old home remedy for corns. Applying directly on the affected area thrice daily will soon make it hardened so that it can be peeled off with a pumice stone. Otherwise, use castor oil with corn pad as a shield. Buy non-medicated doughnut (or) round-shaped pads from pharmacies and stick these pads after applying castor oil on the corns and stick adhesive tape all around the corners to have a firm grip. The pads hold them in place and prevent any kind of pressure thrusting on it. Wear cotton socks in case of any dripping of the castor oil through the pads to absorb them and prevent staining your feet.
Advertisement
Tip 5:
Place a half-cut mildly squeezed lemon on the corn or a slice of pineapple to the size of the corn and attach it with a band-aid or adhesive tape to hold it in place and leave it overnight for quick relief from pain.
Tip 6:
Papaya has natural healing properties for corns. Papaya juice or a bit of papaya flesh placed on the corn overnight will slough off the corn naturally.
Tip 7:
Make a solution of baking soda and lime juice. Apply on the corn overnight for a week. This will make the corn to dry soon and chip off.
Tip 8:
A foot shower with a combination of lukewarm water, Epsom salt and Chamomile tea would be therapeutically beneficial in softening the corn
Tip 9:
The dual combination of apple cider and tea tree oil helps in flaking off corns. First soak your foot in warm water with a pinch of baking soda added to it. Then with the cotton ball just swab apple cider vinegar directly on the corn. Give a mild pressure for a few minutes. Allow the corn to air-dry and then apply tea tree oil. Allow it to dry for 5 minutes. Repeat this for few days for the corns to drop off.