How to Get Rid of Dark Underarms / Dark Armpits
Dark underarms / dark armpits refer to the dark portion of skin under the arm that tends to be darker in color when compared with the rest of the body.
It occurs in both men and women, but normally women tend to become more worried about having dark underarms as it spoils their chances of wearing sleeveless tops or dresses during the summer season. There are a number of home remedies that can help get rid of embarrassing dark underarms.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
What are the Common Causes of Dark Underarms / Dark Armpits?
Having dark underarms/ dark armpits is not a disease or medical condition to worry about. This is caused due to the following reasons:
Dark Colored Clothes: Wearing of dark-colored clothes on a daily basis tend to create friction between the underarms and the cloth material, this leads to darkened underarms. Try wearing loose-fitting clothes or material that ease the underarms to get enough air.
Excessive Use of Hair Removal Creams: Hair removal creams cause discoloration of the skin that leads to darkened armpits.
Use of Deodorants and Perfumes: Excessive usage of deodorants or perfumes directly on your skin tends to darken the underarms due to some chemicals present in them.
Shaving of Underarms: Shaving is the major cause of dark underarms as it only cuts off the hair at the surface of the skin. This leads to thickening of the hair, which increases skin pigmentation and darkens the area.
Hereditary Factors: Dark underarms can occur due to hereditary factors, such as excessive weight or hormonal factors that lead to pigmentation and darkening of the skin.
Excessive Sweating: Skin darkening can happen with excessive sweating as the bacteria present in the skin of the underarms are trapped, resulting in darkening of the skin.
Advertisement
Home Remedies for Dark Underarms / Dark Armpits
Here are some home remedies that can be used to get rid of dark underarms.
Lemon Rub: Lemon is known as a natural cleanser that helps get rid of dark underarms. Rub a slice of lemon on the underarms before taking a bath and keep it for 20-30 minutes daily which will slowly lighten the dark area of the skin. Apply some moisturizer to soften the skin instead of deodorants, for a few days.
Potato Pads: Potato is also known as a bleaching agent, which helps in lightening the dark area of the skin. Slice a thin piece of potato or just grate the potato and apply the juice to the dark area of the skin. Leave it for 15-20 minutes and wash it off with cold water.
Coconut Oil Massage: Coconut oil can be used to lighten the armpits. Simply rub a small amount of coconut oil everyday on the darkened area.
Rose Water and Sandalwood Powder: Make a mixture of rose water and pure sandalwood powder to form a paste and apply it on the underarms. Leave for 20-30 minutes and wash it off with cold water. This helps prevent body odor and whiten the dark area of the skin.
Lemon and Cucumber Juice: Make a mixture of lemon and cucumber juice, with a pinch of turmeric powder in the form of a paste and apply on the dark underarms.
Baking Soda Scrub: Baking soda acts as a natural skin scrubbing that helps lighten the dark underarms. Mix baking soda with a little bit of water and frequently apply on a regular basis to help reduce the discoloration of the underarms.
Orange Peel Pack: Orange peel can be used to lighten the skin tone of dark underarms. Keep the orange peel for a few days till it gets dried up. Grind the orange peel till it turns into a powder and mix it with a bit of rose water and milk. Apply the paste gently on the dark underarms and leave it for 10-15 minutes. Finally, wash it with cold water to remove the dead cells.
Gram Flour Pack: Gram flour is another ingredient that can be used as whitening pack to get rid of dark underarms. Make the pack using a handful of gram flour, yogurt, lemon and a bit of turmeric powder. Mix all these ingredients well till it forms a thick paste. Once it is done, store it in the refrigerator and apply some of the paste on the underarms daily. Leave it for 20-30 minutes, and wash it off with warm water.
Advertisement
Vinegar Mix: Vinegar also helps get rid of dark underarms. Make a mixture of rice flour with vinegar to form a paste. After taking a shower, apply the paste on the underarms. Leave it for 10-15 minutes and wash it off with warm water. This remedy will not only lighten the skin tone but also kills the germs present on the dead cells that cause the underarms to stink.
Wax Mix: Waxing is another way to get rid of dark underarms. Here is a simple home remedy you can try for waxing:
Take 2 cups of sugar, 1/4 cup of lemon juice, 1/4 cup of water and 1/4 cup of honey.
Take a saucepan and boil all these ingredients together.
Stir the mixture well till it turns a deep brown.
Now remove the saucepan and allow the mixture to cool down.
Once it gets cooled, start using it for waxing.