What is Diarrhea?
Diarrhea is characterized by abnormally loose or watery stools, which occur frequently.. It can lead to dehydration. Some of the associated symptoms with diarrhea include pain in the tummy, nausea, high temperature and loss of appetite. Diarrhea can either be acute (short term) or chronic (long term say for more than 2 weeks) (1✔



).
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Diarrhea
Some of the common causes of diarrhea are mentioned here
Infection caused by virus or bacteria
Infected food
Infected water
Drinking too much alcohol
Stress or anxiety
Side effect from some medicines (1✔



).
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedy for Diarrhea
Diarrhea can lead to dehydration, this is very important to understand in infants and children. Oral hydration with glucose or sugar, salt and water should be a standard practice for the treatment of diarrhea. Many tips are provided, and depending on the season or what is available in your kitchen, you can try what is available. Also remember that some tips that work for you may not work for another person.
Tip 1:
Mash a ripe banana. Mix with 1 tsp of tamarind pulp and a pinch of salt. Take twice a day.
Tip 2:
Drink a cup of strong black tea or coffee. A study says that black tea along conventional drugs may help in treating non-bacterial acute diarrhea. However, further research is needed in knowing the exact benefits of black tea in treating diarrhea (2✔



).
Tip 3:
Powder 1/4 tsp of cardamom seeds. Boil this in thin tea water. Add a bit of sugar for taste and drink.
Tip 4:
Soak 2 -3 tsp coriander seeds overnight in half a cup of water. Make a coarse paste mix in a glass of butter milk and drink (3✔



).
Tip 5:
Make a paste of 15-20 tender curry leaves. Mix in 1 tsp honey and drink.
Advertisement
Tip 6:
Mix 1/4 tsp nutmeg powder with 1 ripe banana and eat.
Tip 7:
A tsp of date paste mixed with 1 tsp honey. To be taken 4-5 times a day.
Tip 8:
Mix 1 cup pomegranate juice with 1 cup of sugar cane juice. Have 4 times a day.
Tip 9:
Have 1 cup of fresh Pomegranate juice 3-4 times a day (4✔



).
Tip 10:
Dry Mango seeds in the shade for 3-4 days. Powder and store in a bottle. Take ½ a tspn of this powder with either sugar or honey (5✔



).
Never neglect acute diarrhea. Seek advice of a medical professional as soon as possible but do get started on oral hydration.