Unmanageable and itchy hair? A dry scalp may be the actual culprit for this problem. Dry scalp is a major threat to hair if left untreated as it tends to cause itchiness of the scalp and several other issues.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
There are a number of different products stacked on supermarket shelves, all claiming to have nourishing properties that help prevent scalp dryness; however, sticking to home remedies is a much healthier and easier alternative.
What Causes Dry Scalp?
Extensive use of chemical products, shampoos and conditioners on the hair can take a toll on the scalp, stripping it of its natural moisture, leading to its dryness. Also, long exposure to extreme climatic conditions. For example, sitting in an air-conditioned office or working for long hours in the sun, too can damage the hair and cause dryness of the scalp.
People who style their hair excessively are also prone to a dry scalp. It is also believed that a diet lacking in important nutrients can cause dryness of the scalp.
Advertisement
What are the Symptoms of Dry Scalp?
A dry scalp often brings with it certain symptoms, which make it easy to detect the condition. Itchiness and flaky scalp (dandruff) are some common symptoms of a dry scalp.
Home Remedies for Dry Scalp
Using home remedies to treat a dry scalp is beneficial, as they have no potential side effects associated with their use. Some common home remedies are listed below:
Tea Tree Oil- Tea tree oil, with its powerful antifungal and antibacterial properties, makes an amazing home remedy for dry scalp. The natural oils offer excellent nourishment and moisturization, which combat itchiness, flakiness and dryness and thereby, prevent conditions related to dryness of the scalp.
An important point to remember while using tea tree oil as a remedy for dry scalp is that it should always be diluted before applying to the scalp.
Aloe Vera Gel- Aloe Vera is a plant species that is often used in various herbal medicines. It is rich in amino acids, vitamin A, folic acid and vitamin C. Aloe Vera soothes dry skin from a sunburn, it can also moisturize a dry scalp, which helps to alleviate the presence of pesky flakes. Treating a flaky scalp can also be effective in eliminating dandruff.
Mix a few drops of tea tree oil with the aloe vera gel and add two teaspoons of rose water to this mixture. Cover your scalp with this serum and allow it to soak for 1 hour before a hair wash.
Apple Cider Vinegar- Apple cider vinegar seems to be the home remedy superstar-you’ll find it treating anything and everything right from skin conditions to hair problems. Applying apple cider vinegar to your scalp can help balance the pH of the scalp and helps relieve itching and dryness. Apple cider vinegar too should be diluted with water before use.
Lemon Juice and Honey- Don’t be surprised. This extraordinary mixture does not just help cure a sore throat, but also works amazingly in treating a dry scalp. Honey, with its antibacterial properties, and lemon with its cleansing properties make a successful duo. Applying this mixture to a dry scalp can help treat the condition naturally.
Remember that lemon should not be used on broken, irritated skin as it may cause a stinging sensation or sometimes even aggravate the problem.
Coconut Oil to the Rescue- Coconut oil is one of the widely used home remedies to treat dry scalp. It restores the natural moisture of the scalp and prevents dryness and flakiness. Massage warm coconut oil gently onto the entire scalp, leave it on for an hour, and then rinse.
Advertisement
Sesame Oil- Like tea tree oil, sesame oil too, works by nourishing and moisturizing the scalp, thereby, treating the dry scalp. For best results, massage the oil onto the scalp for 10 minutes before shampoo.
Olive Oil- Olive oil contains vitamin E and monounsaturated fatty acids which can help combat the dryness of the scalp. Heat extra virgin olive oil and gently massage into the scalp and leave it for half an hour. After the allotted time, rinse hair thoroughly.