What is Earache?
Earache is the result of an infection in the ear area. The middle of the ear is normally filled with air. But during a cold, fluid or mucus gets accumulated in the middle ear and may get infected by bacteria, which leads to ear pain. Even infections that affect the ear nerves can be a cause for earache. Longer exposure to loud sound may cause a buzzing or whistling noise in the ear, which leads to a temporary threshold shift, which you are likely to notice as dullness in hearing, usually reversible in a day or two. There are quite a number of reasons for the earache to occur, and all the symptoms require prompt medical care.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Earache
Blockage in the ear tube (Eustachian tube)
Tooth infection such as abscessed teeth
Objects stuck in the ear
Damage to the eardrum
Sinusitis
Earwax
Arthritis
Ear injury
Tonsilitis
Pharyngitis
Home Remedies for Earache
Earache can be sharp and piercing. There are plenty of home remedies for earache that help relieve pain quickly. Here are some remedies and tips for treating ear infections at home.
Tip 1:
Grind a few basil leaves and extract some juice. Apply 2 drops inside the ear.
Tip 2:
Boil 3-4 cloves of garlic in some water. Mash them and add a pinch of salt. Wrap this poultice in a flannel or woolen cloth and place on the aching ear.
Tip 3:
Drip 2 or 3 drops of warm mustard oil into the infected ear and allow it to remain there.
Advertisement
Tip 4:
Soak a clean towel in warm water and compress near the infected ear for about 20 minutes. This reduces pain and discomfort quickly.
Tip 5:
Place a bowl of boiling water and add several drops of eucalyptus oil and a teaspoon of Vicks. Use a towel to cover your head and inhale the steam through the nose several times till the pain subsides. This will ease the pressure and help to drain the fluids from the ear.
Tip 6:
Extract the juice from onions and dip a cotton ball or cloth in the juice, and press it against the ear. It reduces the inflamed lining and eliminates the microbial activity that causes itching, redness and pain.
Tip 7:
Include foods in your diet that are rich in vitamin C such as lemons, oranges, guavas, strawberries and papayas to reduce the earache.
Tip 8:
Take a mixture of white vinegar and rubbing alcohol and apply in the ear with a dropper. Use cotton to cover the ear and leave it for an hour. Keep repeating this method until it is healed.
Tip 9:
Extract the juice from ginger and apply a few drops in the ear. This will relieve the pain and reduce inflammation.
Tip 10:
Heat 4 or 5 tablespoons of salt in a saucepan and stir till it turns a little brown. Place the heated salt in a clean cloth and wrap it properly. Press the cloth towards the affected ear for 2 to 5 minutes daily whenever it’s required until the swelling and pain subside.
Try out any of the above mentioned easy and simple home remedies to relieve earache. If the pain persists, consult your doctor for further treatment.