What is Eczema?
Eczema (Atopic Dermatitis) is an inflammation of the skin with itchy, red, thickening and scaling skin eruptions. Itching is the dominant symptom and can be severe. Eczema is not contagious. The most common type is atopic eczema.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Eczema
Inheritance
Environmental Factors
Specific allergies to foods
Secondary infection
Wool next to the skin
Pet animals (fur)
Soaps or detergents
Dust mites and pollen
Home Remedies for Eczema
Tip 1:
Coconut oil can be used as a natural moisturizer, as it is extracted from coconut meat. Applying coconut oil topically can help reduce the amount of staph bacteria on the skin, thereby, reducing the chance of infection. Choose coconut oils that are virgin or cold-pressed and apply it once or twice a day to damp the skin.
Tip 2:
nutmeg against a smooth stone with a few drops of water. Make a smooth paste. Apply.
Tip 3:
Turmeric helps reduce inflammation in many skin conditions. Curcumin found in turmeric acts as an antioxidant, which helps protect the skin from infections and reduces the healing time for wounds. Add 1 tbsp turmeric powder to 1 tbsp of bitter neem leaves. Grind to paste and apply.
Tip 4:
Tea tree oil can help treat a variety of skin conditions due to its anti-inflammatory, antiseptic and nourishing properties. However, essential oils need to be diluted before using them on the skin. Tea tree oil can be used in combination with olive oil, as it helps prevent itching, dry skin and skin infections, including eczema.
Advertisement
Tip 5:
Bathing plays an important role in eczema treatment, as it helps moisturize the skin. National Eczema Association (NEA) recommends adults to bathe at least once a day using lukewarm water for 10–15 minutes. Gentle cleansers should be used instead of soaps and scrubbing the skin needs to be avoided. After bathing, apply an oil-based moisturizer within 3 minutes and gently pat the skin dry to prevent eczema.
Tip 6:
Aloe vera has antibacterial and antimicrobial effects, which helps in preventing skin infections. Aloe vera's wound-healing properties help soothe broken skin and promote healing. Also, you can apply aloe vera gel for a nice cooling effect to itchy skin.