What is Erectile Dysfunction or Impotence?
Erectile dysfunction (ED) or impotence is an erection problem of men. It is a condition that affects men over 40 years of age and it is often treatable. Erectile dysfunction is defined as the failure to achieve rigid penile erection adequate for satisfactory sexual intercourse.
Erectile Dysfunction can sometimes be the first sign of underlying health problems such as diabetes, high blood pressure or cardiovascular disease. The most common precipitating factor for such a problem in younger men includes stress and anxiety, and this can have an impact on their relationships.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Some men also suffer from premature ejaculation – this means that they ejaculate the semen before they can penetrate or enter the vagina of their partner. This too, can be very distressing. However this should not be confused with problems of erection. In both the conditions, the man is not able to establish a relationship with their partner.
As a man gets older andropause (male menopause) slowly sets in and the men lose their potency. Hence erectile dysfunction is very common in older men (1✔



).
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Erectile Dysfunction
There are many natural remedies for erectile dysfunction. Most of these are safe and will not cause any harm. There are some long-term and some short-term recommendations to overcome the problem. There are other recommendations that can be followed regularly.
Long term Goals
If you are overweight or obese - you should lose weight. Check here if you are overweight. The scientific study suggests that lifestyle changes and losing weight are effective in treating one third of obese men with erectile dysfunction (2✔



).
Exercise is a great way that helps with underlying problems of erectile dysfunction. Regular exercise will help you in a number of ways such as reducing stress, weight loss and increasing blood flow in the body. Thirty minutes of brisk walk is enough to keep your system functioning well. About 40 minutes of aerobic exercise of moderate to vigorous intensity 4 times a week is recommended to decrease erectile dysfunction (3✔



).
1. Consume food that is rich in zinc such as turkey, chicken, prawns, peanuts, avocado, mushrooms, whole grain products, yogurt, beef and lamb is generally good for sexual health. It will help in boosting the production of testosterone and enhance sperm mobility too. Zinc is very essential for male fertility and considered as a nutrient marker in prevention, diagnosis and treatment of male infertility (4✔



).
2. Vitamin E - promotes good blood flow and circulation within the body. It's strong antioxidants properties helps in removing harmful free radicals. This can be had as a capsule or by eating vitamin E rich food (5✔



) .
For Immediate Beneficial Results
1. Regular intake of a glass of milk at night before going to bed is another healthy option.
In fact, in India, many families traditionally give the bridegroom a glass of milk with crushed pepper and powdered almonds on the wedding night to help with potency!
2. Chocolate has two chemicals – serotonin and phenylethylamine which act on the pleasure area of the brain to give a feeling happy and positive feeling. A study indicates that the principal component serotonin in chocolate stimulates sexual desire (6✔



).
3. Dried fruits such as almonds, dates, raisins, pistachios, apricots and prunes are rich sources of potassium and sodium. Snacking of dried fruits at night proves to be equally energizing. The study suggests that dried fruits and nuts may improve erectile and sexual desire (7✔



).
4. A mixture of powdered walnuts and honey are a natural remedy that proves to be an effective decoction to tide over erectile problems. Take equal measure of powdered walnuts and honey and mix it well. Take a spoonful of this mixture thrice a day followed by a cup of milk.
5. Drumstick has certain aphrodisiac properties that are effective for treating problems like premature ejaculation and thin semen problem. Heat a glass of milk with drumstick flower until it boils, cools down the mixture and drinks this remedy for one or two months continuously for a better result. This can be had as a vegetable or used in a soup too. The use of Moringa oleifera leaf extract improves sexual health (8✔



).
6. Watermelon is natural Viagra; it has citrulline content that helps to relax blood vessels and promote the flow of blood to the penis. Cut the outer skin of the watermelon in small pieces and run through a juicer and drink the juice; this can help potency (9✔



).
7. Pomegranate has antioxidants, fiber, vitamins, potassium and niacin that are essential for a healthy sexual life. Drinking pomegranate juice may help against erectile dysfunction (10✔



).
8. Garlic contains a compound called allicin, which can improve blood flow to the sexual organs and help in enhancing erection. Consume two to three cloves of garlic before food or cut some garlic and sprinkle it on your favorite food (11✔



).
Other foods that can also help erectile dysfunction includes pumpkins seeds, tomatoes, shellfish, spinach, banana, green tea, eggs, peanuts, salmon, coffee and pink grapefruit.
Common Causes of Erectile Dysfunction
There are several causes, such as physical and mental problems that are linked with erectile dysfunction. There may be one or more cause to the problem. Certain medication can also cause problems with erections. If you have started a new tablet and encountered such a problem – please consult your doctor immediately.
Physical Causes:
Alcohol and drug abuse
Hormonal causes
Heart disease
Hypertension (high blood pressure)
Overweight and Obesity
Hyperlipidemia
Arteriosclerosis (Clogged blood vessel)
Parkinson's disease
Multiple sclerosis
Low testosterone
Prostate cancer treatment
Bowel cancer treatment
Injuries to the pelvic area or spinal cord
Kidney disease
Metabolic syndrome
Peyronie’s disease (scar tissue inside the penis)
Stroke
Mental Health (Psychological) Causes:
Anxiety
Stress
Depression
Relaxation difficulties
Relationship issues (12✔



)