What is Frizzy Hair?
Hair is made up of three layers and the outer cuticle layer looks like a shingled roof. In smooth hair, these shingles lie flat while in curly hair, the shingles lift. Frizzy hair is dry and naturally absorbs moisture from humid hair which is another reason for lifting the shingles.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
What are the Causes of Frizzy Hair?
Changes in the hair quality occurring as a result of variations in the humidity levels making the hair strand expand and reshape causes the hair to frizz. Factors which play significant role in affecting hair are:
Cold weather
Central heating
Air conditioning
Monsoons are also that time of the year when the hair is frizziest because it attracts a lot of moisture from the humid atmosphere. Frizzy hair can be identified through crinkling, split ends, dryness or bad hair quality resulting from drying or damage to follicles, chemical treatments, and regular use of bleaching creams, dyes and perm products.
How to Get Rid of Frizzy Hair
Rehydration
The key to control frizzy hair is conditioning which allows adequate rehydration of the hair.
If you have been wondering how to get rid of frizzy hair, then a hair conditioning treatment at home is your best bet to reverse the damage caused to your hair.
Massage your hair with oil from the mid length to the tips, leave for 20 minutes to 1 hour depending on the length of your hair and rinse off with the help of a shampoo.
Oil Your Hair
Coconut oil is a good ‘leave on conditioner’ for hair and works well by restoring natural oil balance, keeping away the frizz, moisturizing hair, preventing the loss of proteins and protecting hair from pollutants.
Sunflower oil is light in texture and when applied on hair, it can make curly hair smooth and frizz-free. It has gamma alpha-linoleic acid and prevents hair from becoming too thin.
Advertisement
How to Wash your Hair?
The technique used to wash hair has an effect on the hair quality. Frequent washing can wash away the natural oils of the hair and hence devoid the hair of its natural nourishment and hydration.
Wash your hair 3 to 5 times in a week especially during winters.
While shampooing your hair, use your fingertips to apply and massage the shampoo on the scalp. This allows cleaning of the scalp and natural oils but keeps your hair in a much better condition.
Rinse off with water over the ends of your strands so that any cosmetic product or environmental waste is removed.
Apple Cider Vinegar
It is an amazing remedy for hair. Mix 2 tbsp of apple cider vinegar in little water, apply into your scalp, leave for 10 to 15 minutes, rinse your hair properly and repeat regularly for long lasting effects.
Drying your Hair
Another home remedy for dry frizzy hair is to blow-dry your hair instead of allowing it to dry naturally. Blow dry helps in closing and smoothening the cuticle. After blow drying, blast the strands with cold air to seal the cuticle. It is not advisable to leave the hair damp.
Proper Diet
For all those who want to know how to get rid of frizzy hair, it should not be news that proper diet will help you well in keeping hair healthy. Your diet should comprise of essential vitamins, mineral and nutrients needed to keep the moisture of hair intact. Vitamin B complex, vitamin C, vitamin E and vitamin A are essential ingredients for a healthy scalp and hair.
Home Remedies for Frizzy Hair
Many home remedies for frizzy hair have been adopted from simple kitchen ingredients. Some tips for healthy hair home remedies include:
Mash avocado and olive oil into a creamy mixture and apply on washed hair. Leave it for approximately 45 minutes and clean it with a shampoo.
Take warm olive oil and massage in about quarter teaspoon through your hair starting at the ends and working up the roots. This is an excellent conditioner for hair and should be done once in a week.
One of the best home remedies for dry frizzy hair has been suggested to be application of a good conditioner, wrapping a hot towel around it and rinsing the hair after 20 minutes. This works wonderfully in making hair soft and frizz free by transferring moisture in the conditioner to your hair.
Advertisement
Those with curly hair should use a deep cleansing shampoo as a weekly hair regimen to eliminate the residue on hair left by rain water during monsoons.
Coconut oil can be applied on still damp or dry hair both but the best moisturization results are obtained with damp hair. Apply the oil on the ends, less in the middle with very little on the roots. Leave this on your hair and allow drying to get frizz free hair.
Make a paste using egg and 1 tbsp. olive oil and apply on hair. Leave this for about half an hour and rinse off. This helps in nourishing the hair with lost oils and hydrating the hair.
Make a mixture with dry hibiscus leaves and warm coconut oil, apply on hair and leave overnight. Wash normally in the morning. This is a good home remedy for frizzy hair as it replaces the lost oils.
Vinegar is also good for hair and makes it smoother and silkier.
Drink lots of fluids and water.
Improve your diet and lead a healthy lifestyle.
Tips on How to Get Rid of Frizzy Hair
Wash your hair effectively with natural and mild shampoo
Do not brush your hair frequently to avoid damage
Cover hair with hat or scarves to prevent damage from extreme weather conditions