What are Genital Warts?
Genital warts or venereal warts, the small grey or flesh-coloured bumps found on the skin around the genital areas, are symptoms of human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. HPV is transmitted from one person to another during genital, oral or anal sex with an infected partner. It is also spread through direct skin-to-skin contact during sex (1✔



).
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Genital warts are most often found in clusters, giving it a cauliflower-like appearance. They are usually found on the external surfaces of the body like the head of the penis, penile shaft, scrotum, vaginal lips and around the anus. Warts can spread to inner parts like urethral opening, inside the vagina, on the cervix or inside the anus (2✔



).
What are the Causes of Genital Warts?
Genital warts are caused by infection with human papillomavirus, transmitted through various modes like:
Penetrative sex
Skin-to-skin contact during sexual activity
Unprotected sex with an infected partner
From an infected mother to child during birth
Sharing of swimsuits, underwear or bath towels with the infected person
From hands of an infected mother to baby during activities such as diaper changing
Smoking enhances the risk for genital warts (1✔



)
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Genital Warts
Use of liquid nitrogen for warts removal has been the standard treatment procedure for genital warts. The procedure, called cryotherapy, involves the application of extremely cold substance like liquid nitrogen or a mixture of dimethyl ether and propane on the wart (3✔



). However, they have other side-effects and can be very painful.
Many people suffering from genital warts look for solutions of how to get rid of HPV warts fast and some of the following home remedies for genital warts can be an end to their search.
Apple Cider Vinegar: Use of apple cider vinegar for genital warts removal has been found to be effective. Clean the area of skin with warts and apply apple cider vinegar on the warts with a cotton swab. Leave it for about 10-15 minutes and wipe with a dry cloth. Doing this thrice a day for at least a week will turn the surface of the wart into a dry scaly tissue that can be peeled off easily. Holding a cotton swab dipped in apple cider vinegar against the wart with a tape for about 2-3 hours can help in severe cases of warts. However, it is important to wash away the vinegar as it can burn the healthy portion of the skin if retained for long.
Tea Tree Oil: Tea tree oil is known for its antiseptic, anti-fungal, and anti-viral properties. Mix 4-5 drops of tea tree oil with 1 tablespoon of almond oil or olive oil. Dab the mixture several times a day on the warts.
Alternately, mix a few drops of tea tree oil in half a bucket of water and soak in this water for about 30 minutes. This will also help to reduce the itching around warts (4✔



).
Castor Oil: Apply castor oil directly on the warts and the surrounding skin before going to bed. Leave it for the night and wash it in the morning. In about 2 to 3 weeks, the warts turn black and fall off.
Garlic Cloves:Garlic is an anti-viral agent. According to a study, the anti-viral activity of garlic helps in inhibiting the spread of virally infected cells (5✔



). Use crushed garlic paste directly on the genital warts and cover them with a bandage. After one hour, wash it off with water. This can be done 2 times a day till you get rid of the warts. Another method involves using garlic with castor oil. Apply castor oil and place a clove of garlic on the wart. Hold the garlic with a tape and leave it overnight. Wash it off with water in the morning.
Banana Peel: The enzymes in the banana peel can help safely dissolve warts. Place a piece of the inside of the banana peel against the wart (you should be seeing the yellow part of the banana peel). Hold it in place with a tape or bandage and leave it overnight. Wash it off in the morning.
Witch Hazel: Witch hazel has astringent and antioxidant properties that cut off the blood supply to the warts (6✔



). This might shrink the warts and allow them to fall off. Apply the distilled liquid solution of witch hazel directly to the warts. Leave it for about 10 minutes and wipe it off with a dry cloth.
Thuja Occidentalis: Using thuja for treating genital warts is commonly suggested by homeopathic doctors. Place 2-4 drops of thuja extract on the wart and cover it with a garlic or banana peel and hold it with tape.
Onion Juice: Onion is anti-microbial and when combined with salt, it may help in healing genital warts. Soak onion (sliced and sprinkled with salt) overnight, make a paste and extract the juice of this paste by passing it through a sieve. Apply this juice to the genital warts on a daily basis for 3-4 weeks, or until the warts peel off.
Extract of Olive Leaf: Olive leaf has been found to inhibit viral growth by directly penetrating the viral cells and has been used as a treatment for genital warts since the ancient era in Egypt. Steep 1 tablespoon of dried olive leaves in one cup of hot water. Strain and consume the tea 2-4 times a day. Pregnant women with warts have to consult their doctor before consuming olive leaf tea.
Pineapple juice: Pineapple contains an enzyme called bromelain that helps in healing inflammation on the skin (7✔



). It also contains manganese that reduces scars of the healed wart areas. Squeeze out juice from fresh pineapple and apply on the warts with a cotton swab. Let the cotton swabs be there for about 10 minutes. Wipe off the juice with a dry cloth. This routine can be done 2-3 times a day.
Willow Tree Bark: The bark of the Willow tree is a natural source of salicylic acid that has anti-inflammatory properties (8✔



). It could be used for treatment of acne, inflammation and joint and muscular pains. Scrape the willow tree bark into pieces and moisten them by sprinkling a little water on them. Place the moistened bits directly on the wart and hold it in place with a tape. Leave it for overnight or for a whole day. Change the bark everyday.
Sap of Fig Leaf: The sap of a fig tree contains the enzyme ficain, which does not cause any burning or irritation on the skin and helps in healing warts (9✔



). Break a fresh fig leaf or twig to take out the milky sap. Dab the sap with a cotton swab directly on the warts 2-3 times a day. There is no need to wipe or wash off the sap.
Milkweed: The sap of the milkweed can also work in the same way as the sap of the fig leaf. Break the weed and extract the oozing sap. Dab the sap directly on the warts and let it stay. Do this once or twice a day.