What is Gout?
Gout is an acute and most painful rheumatic disease, caused by the accumulation of crystals of uric acid (monosodium urate) in the joints, tendons and other tissues of the body. These deposits cause attacks of arthritis with inflammation and pain. The attack may develop suddenly during the night. Gout can be experienced commonly at big toe joint and also at other joints such as foot, hand, knee or shoulder (1✔



).
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Gout
Gout usually occurs earlier in men than women. Men can be three times more likely than women to get it because they have higher levels of uric acid most of their lives. But in women, it generally occurs after menopause as their uric acid reach higher level after menopause (2✔



).
Kidney failure
Hereditary factors
Obesity
Diuretics
High blood pressure
Alcoholism
Physical stress
Fatigue
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Gout
Tip 1:
Cherries are packed with antioxidants which may help with gout pain relief. High levels of anthocyanin present in cherries may help reduce inflammation and gout flare-ups. So, try to eat 15 to 20 cherries a day to keep gout symptoms at bay. According to a study, the antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of cherries may help to reduce acute and chronic inflammation associated with gout (3✔



).
Advertisement
Tip 2:
Apples contain malic acid, which may help in reducing uric acid levels in the body. Malic acid makes apples to be a part in gout-reducing diets, as it may help reduce swelling and relieve pain. So, make sure to eat one apple after every meal to prevent gout.
Tip 3:
Fresh ginger has anti-inflammatory properties which may help in treating gout. Adding ginger to your daily meals while cooking may be the easiest and simple way to treat gout. Drinking a glass of ginger water every day may also help relieve gout symptoms effectively. According to a research, ginger has strong antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties and can be used as a curative agent in treating gout (4✔



).
Tip 4:
Lemon juice may help balance uric acid levels, as it makes the body more alkaline. Therefore, drinking a glass of freshly squeezed lemonade every day may relieve gout pain and swelling. So, hurry up, squeeze the juice of ½ a lime in 1 glass of water. Drink this juice in the morning, noon, and night which may help manage gout symptoms (5✔



).
Tip 5:
Epsom salt contains high levels of magnesium, which may help lower gout risk. Soaking the affected body part in warm water containing a mixture of Epsom salt may offer instant pain relief, reduce swelling, and prevent gout attacks (5✔



).
Advertisement
Tip 6:
Include lots of green veggies such as French beans, lentils, and green leafy vegetables which may help to get rid of gout attacks. Extract ½ a cup of juice of French beans (String beans). Drink this juice every day for a month.
Tip 7:
Apple cider vinegar is one of the simple and natural home remedies for gout pain and swelling. The acidity in the vinegar may help relieve pain and reduce inflammation. Further research is needed as to why this remedy works for some people and why it doesn’t work for some people. So, add a teaspoon of apple cider vinegar to a glass of water and drink it 2 to 3 times a day (5✔



).