What is a Headache?
Headache is among the most common medical complaints. The majority of them are not life-threatening. They can be classified into three main categories, namely:
Tension headaches
Migraine headaches
Cluster headaches
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Tension Headaches are the most common type of headaches. Head aches are described as pressure tightness or it may be stress related. Migraines have well-defined attacks with symptoms like nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to lights and sounds. Cluster headaches are repetitive ones that occur for weeks to months at a time, followed by periods of remission (1✔



).
Common Causes of Headache
A variety of factors can trigger headaches-
Prolonged stress or tension
Several physiologic changes in the head and brain
Dilation and constriction of blood vessels
Abnormal activity of certain neurons
Genetic factors may be a cause for migraines
Smoking and alcohol may cause cluster headaches
Medication overuse
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Advertisement
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Headache
Try these home remedies, which may aid in subsiding headaches.
Tip 1
Roast some caraway seeds dry. Tie in a soft handkerchief or muslin cloth and sniff to get some relief from headaches.
Tip 2
Boil 1 ½ cup of milk with a pinch of powdered cinnamon for one or two minutes. Add a teaspoon of honey, mix and stir it thoroughly, and drink it at least twice a day when suffering from a headache (2✔



).
Tip 3
Eating a chopped apple sprinkled with salt every morning for at least a week may help inhibit chronic headaches.
Tip 4
Rosemary has been used as folk medicine for alleviating headaches. Head massage with rosemary oil or applying pain balm on the forehead that contains menthol may prove to be an effective way to ease migraine pain (3✔



).
Tip 5
Ginger has anti-inflammatory properties and may help reduce pain and nausea in some people. Add tea leaves and ginger to 1 cup of boiling water. Stir it well and drain the water. Leave it till it cools a bit and drink it. This remedy cannot be used as a formal treatment for treating migraine headaches. It can be used as an additional measure to help reduce the pain associated with a migraine headache (4✔



).
Tip 6
Peppermint oil may be used as a home remedy especially in soothing headaches caused by tension. This fresh-smelling oil helps regulate blood flow in the body. This oil can be applied on forehead or used in steam inhalation (5✔



).
Tip 7
Lavender oil may be used as a home remedy for headaches and migraines. The oil can be either inhaled or applied to your head. For inhaling, add 2-4 drops of lavender oil to 3 cups of boiling water and inhale the oil vapors (6✔



).
Tip 8
The essential oil of basil may be used as a natural treatment for headaches caused by migraines. The oil works as a muscle relaxant and is helpful for headaches caused by tension and tight muscles. A few drops of this oil can be added to a steam inhalator which could help in subsiding headaches (7✔



).
Tip 9
Food items like chocolate, sour cream, nuts, peanut butter and caffeinated beverages like coffee, tea or cola, can act as triggers for migraine headaches. Maintain a food diary and make a note of the foods that act as a trigger so that you can avoid them (8✔



).
Tip 10
Mix ½ cup of apple cider vinegar with a ½ cup of water. Boil the mixture in a covered saucepan. When it boils, remove from heat and leave for a minute. Lift the cover and slowly inhale the steam through your nose. This may provide instant relief from sinus headaches.
Tip 11
Make a warm soup and add some pepper in it. Warm soup will help you to get rid of nasal blockage and will cure headaches.
Advertisement
Tip 12
Fatigue and lack of sleep can contribute to headaches during pregnancy. Make sure you get enough sleep during pregnancy (9✔



).
Tip 13
Drink plenty of water daily, as it is important to stay hydrated especially when you are pregnant as dehydration can be a big cause of headache (10✔



).
Tip 14
Apply a hot or cold compress to your forehead and neck to get instant relief from headache (11✔



).
Tip 15
Physical activity like exercising and daily walk may help prevent headaches (12✔



, 13✔



).
Tip 16
Eat small regular meals and make sure that you are eating healthy organic food throughout the day. This will keep your blood sugar on an even level, which may help prevent headaches.
Tip 17
Make sure that your kid is getting enough sleep, as sleeping often resolves headaches in children (14✔



).
Tip 18
Give your child water, juice, and other beverages that do not contain caffeine. This may help prevent headaches in children.