What is Immune System?
"Man is a creature composed of countless millions of cells: a microbe is composed of only one, yet throughout the ages the two have been in ceaseless conflict." - A.B. Christie
The immune system is the human body’s defense system. It is made up of special cells and chemicals that fight infection from viruses, bacteria and other microbes. The immune system attacks organisms and substances that enter our system and cause disease through a series of steps called the immune response. A weak immune system increases the chance of becoming ill and one gets affected easily with any type of infection. To ensure that the immune system functions well here are some home remedies that can help boost your immune system naturally.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Low Immunity
Stress
Poor diet
Lack of sleep
Medications
Lack of hygiene
Lack of exercise
Smoking
Dehydration
Home Remedies to Improve Low Immunity
Tip 1:
Drinking plenty of water can help your body system to function adequately and remove toxins and other contaminants from your body.
Tip 2:
Lack of sleep can affect an individual’s immune system. Our body needs about 8 to 9 hours of sleep daily.
Advertisement
Tip 3:
Vitamin C has effective properties that can boost your immune system. Hence, consume foods rich in vitamin C such as berries, citrus fruit, tomatoes and dark green vegetables to help increase your body’s immunity.
Tip 4:
Garlic has anti-inflammatory properties that are effective against bacteria, parasites and viruses. So use lots of garlic while preparing your food to help improve your immune system.
Tip 5:
Nuts and dried fruits such as almonds, cashew nuts, peanuts, apricots, pistachios, dried kiwis, raisins, pumpkin seeds and so on are rich in Vitamin A, E and K. They are also rich sources of calcium, iron and copper. These micronutrients are essential for the body as it helps in maintaining and improving immunity.
Tip 6:
A healthy diet plays an important role to improve your immune system. Eat healthy and nutritious foods that are rich in vitamins and minerals such as green leafy vegetables, fruits, beans, whole grain and seeds to help boost your immune system
Tip 7:
Green tea is another remedy that can help stimulate production of immune cells. Drink a glass of green tea every morning before having your breakfast to have a strong immune system.
Tip 8:
Yogurt is also one of the best remedies for improving low immunity. A study says that yogurt helps in increasing the number of Lactobacillus Casei (a probiotic) in the digestive system.