What are Insect Bites?
Insect bites are puncture wounds or stings of venom made by insects into our skin. The bites from mosquitoes, fleas and mites are mostly not severe but can cause immediate skin reactions like redness, swelling, pain or itching.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Bites from sting bees, fire ants, hornets, wasps are usually painful and sometimes they can cause a severe allergic reaction known as anaphylaxis, which is life-threatening if not treated on time. The most dangerous insect bite is from a black spider, which can cause death if left untreated.
Common Insect Bites
Common insect bites and stings that can lead to allergic reactions are caused by the following insects-
Mosquitoes
Fleas
Mites
Spiders
Bees
Wasps
Hornets
Symptoms of Insect Bites
Swelling
Localized pain
Redness
Itching
Rashes
Numbness
Burning
Tingling sensation
Cramps
Breathlessness
Weakness
Stiffness or joint pain
Nausea or vomiting
Advertisement
Home Remedies for Insect Bites
Honey has powerful anti-microbial properties that helps relieve the itching sensation and also, prevent infection. Take a clean cloth or a cotton ball, dip into honey and apply this onto the affected parts.
A mixture of cider vinegar and lemon juice may be applied on the affected area with a cotton ball.
Aloe vera gel is a natural antiseptic agent that is very effective in treating insect bites. Take a fresh aloe vera leaf, simply cut it open and rub it onto the affected area to reduce the swelling, pain and itching sensation.
Onion contains enzymes that help break down the inflammatory compounds. Cut a slice of onion and rub it over the affected part.
Baking soda is another ingredient that is used for treating insect bites. Take a teaspoon of baking soda and add a few drops of water, mix well till it makes a paste. Apply this paste gently onto the affected area, leave for a few minutes and wash off with warm water.
Papaya has medicinal enzymes that can heal the bites of insects. Slice a raw papaya and apply on the affected part to slow down the swelling effect.
Tea tree oil serves as anesthesia. It can be applied externally on the affected part to reduce the swelling of insect bites.
Use an ice pack and rub on the area of bite or sting for 15-20 minutes. This will help in reducing the inflammation or swelling that causes itching.
Advertisement
Toothpaste has anti-inflammatory substances like baking soda and menthol that help reduce the pain when it is applied to the affected area.
Dab a piece of cotton to lavender oil and apply directly to the affected area to get quick relief from itching sensation.