What is Itchy Skin?
Itchy skin, also known as pruritus is an uncomfortable skin irritation that makes you want to scratch the affected area to relieve the itching feeling. Itching is a common problem with everyone and may result in a rash or another condition. The main causes for itchiness can range from dry skin, insect bites, skin lesions, internal illnesses such as liver or kidney disease to skin rashes, and allergies (1✔



).
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Itchy Skin
The following are the common causes of itchy skin:
Skin lesions
Dry skin
Internal illnesses
Blister
Eczema
Pregnancy
Menopause
Allergy (2✔



)
Insect bites or stings
Lack of hygiene
Drugs
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Itchy Skin
Here are some home remedies that may help in reducing the itchiness on skin.
Tip 1:
Apple cider vinegar (ACV) is effective antiseptic agent that may help relieve dry and itchy skin. Dab a cotton ball on the vinegar and apply on the itchy area, this will help the itching go away.
Tip 2:
According to a study, Aloe vera helps in retaining skin moisture and aids in wound healing. It can be used as a complementary treatment along with other treatments.Aloe vera can be used to treat itchy skin. Just slice a piece of aloe vera and rub the gel on the affected skin. This helps to relieve the irritation and swelling of the skin (3✔



).
Tip 3:
Basil leaves contain a substance called eugenol, which acts like topical anesthetic. Boil some basil leaves into a tea, allowing it to cool, then use a cotton ball and apply on the itching part.
Advertisement
Tip 4:
Mint is another herb that has antiseptic and anti-inflammatory properties. Therefore, it can be used to reduce the itchiness. This can be applied in the same manner as basil on the itching area whenever it’s needed.
Tip 5:
A published research article says that oatmeal has anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, which are effective for dermatologic inflammatory diseases like atopic dermatitis. Oatmeal is a remedy that can be used for dry itchy skin, as it helps to moisturize the skin. Mix oatmeal in water and apply the mixture on the irritated skin, leave for 10-15 minutes, then wash off with cold water. Repeat this remedy until the itching stops (4✔



).
Tip 6:
Essential oils like chamomile oil, clove oil, lavender oil, neem oil, and so on are some of the best essential oils for treating itchy skin. You can add a few drops of any essential oil to your bath water or apply it directly on your skin to lessen.
Tip 7:
Lemon is a rich source of vitamin C, has bleaching properties, and it is commonly used home remedy to treat itchy skin. Slice a lemon and squeeze out the juice, then apply it directly on the itchy part to relieve from skin irritation.
Tip 8:
Coconut oil can work wonders for treating dry or itchy skin. You can apply coconut oil directly onto the affected area. You can also soak in lukewarm water, then pat yourself dry and apply the oil all over to reduce skin irritation.
Tip 9:
According to a research, the leaves of acalypha indica is a traditional remedy used in treating eczema.Take the leaves of acalypha indica( Indian Nettle ),and add turmeric powder convert into a mixture of the paste, Apply to itchy area of skin. (5✔



).
Tip 10:
Cooling the itching area of skin, using ice cubes, gel packs, cool compresses or cold water can temporarily reduce the itching (6✔



).
Tips for Healthy Skin
The following are some tips to keep your skin healthy:
Excessive exposure to sunlight can lead to sun tan or wrinkles. Hence, use sunscreen every day, even if you are indoors to prevent skin damage.
Lack of water content in the body can lead to skin inflammation, blemishes, aging, dehydration and so on. Drink at least 8 glasses of water daily to keep your skin hydrated and plump.
Cleansing helps remove excess dirt, opens up clogged pores, and gets rid of pollutants from the skin. Massage your skin gently for about 20 minutes with a skin care product that suits your skin.
Eating healthy foods that are rich in vitamins and minerals like spinach, salmon, almonds, and berries can boost your immune system and also improve the texture or quality of your skin.
Skin exfoliation removes dirt and helps in reducing the appearance of wrinkles. It helps promote the process of skin renewal, thereby making the skin healthy and fresh. Therefore, make sure to exfoliate your skin daily to improve overall skin texture.