Can’t seem to shoo away that itchy feeling on your head? You’re not alone; statistics reveal that an itchy scalp is a common ailment, and is the result of an underlying skin condition.
Read on to know more about the basics of an itchy scalp and some simple home remedies to handle it better.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Causes of an Itchy Scalp
Socially unacceptable and is embarrassing, this condition is typically observed in patients suffering from skin conditions of the scalp such as seborrheic dermatitis, eczema, psoriasis and fungal infections of the scalp. An itchy scalp is often accompanied by dandruff (white-colored flakes of dead skin), making the condition even more concerning.
Other causes of an itchy scalp are listed below-
Improper hair care
Fungal and/or viral infections of the scalp
Anxiety and stress
Hair lice
Dryness of the scalp (due to weather changes)
Sebaceous cysts
Improper cleaning and washing of the hair and scalp
Allergic reactions due to certain chemical-based hair products
Poor diet
Advertisement
Symptoms of Itchy Scalp
An itchy scalp is identified by an itchy sensation on the scalp, which is sometimes very severe, and is accompanied by tender, painful spots on the scalp or a burning sensation.
Home Remedies for an Itchy Scalp
You don’t necessarily need a galore of shampoos and products to treat itchy scalp - you're weapons lie right at your home. We've listed down some of the tried and tested home remedies to treat an itchy scalp. Read on…
Essential Oil Power- Don’t restrict the use of essential oils to just aromatherapy; a mixture of essential oils is considered a good home remedy for an itchy scalp. Choose from natural oils like lavender oil, tea tree oil, almond oil, coconut oil, avocado oil, olive oil and peppermint oil.
Always remember to use these oils in their diluted form, especially if you have a sensitive scalp. Regular application of these oils help nourish and moisturize the skin of the scalp, and prevent bacterial and fungal infections.
Lemon Goodness- Yet another powerful home remedy for treating an itchy scalp is the lemon. Simply squeeze a lemon, and apply its juice directly to your scalp before shampooing. This home remedy is effective in treating dandruff too!
If you have a dry scalp, mix together the juice of a lemon and 4 tablespoons of fresh curd. The curd will help moisturize your scalp naturally, while the lemon will fight against dandruff and an itchy scalp.
Apple Cider to the Rescue- You may find apple cider vinegar cropping up in the home remedies section of almost every condition; and why not? With its powerful anti-inflammatory properties and its natural goodness, apple cider is truly a star!
To treat an itchy scalp, make a mixture of apple cider vinegar and water, and apply it directly onto the scalp using a cotton ball. Leave it on for a few minutes and rinse with clear water. Apple cider helps cure yeast and viral infections of the scalp that cause the itchy sensation, de-rooting the problem from its very core.
Aloe Vera Power-This wonder plant may have helped you reduce your sunburn, or calm down aggravated acne; now it’s time to harness the power of aloe vera for the scalp. The gel obtained from the aloe vera plant works in two ways-its antibacterial properties prevent the growth of bacteria that cause scalp infections, and its cooling, soothing properties help prevent itching and burning of the scalp.
Just cut out a leaf of the aloe vera plant and extract the gel; apply it directly onto the scalp, leave on for 10 minutes and then rinse.