What are Kidney Stones?
Kidney stones are one of the most painful disorders that affect humans. Kidney stones are solid masses of mineral salt deposits that are normally filtered through the kidney and emptied via Urine. Urine has a natural substance, which dissolves these minerals, thereby preventing them into becoming solids or calculi.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Sometimes due to dehydration, these salts don’t get dissolved and crystallization takes place. It grows large enough to obstruct the renal ducts or get stuck in the ureter, causing sharp and severe pain in the urinary tract. Untreated, kidney stones can cause renal failure.
Common Causes of Kidney Stones
Urinary tract infection (UTI)
Overdoses of vitamin D
Mineral imbalance
Kidney disease
Dehydration
Gout
Diet
Advertisement
Home Remedies for Kidney Stones
Basil Leaves Good for Kidney Health:
Basil leaves (Tulsi) are good for the overall health of kidneys. Mix 1 teaspoon of juice from basil leaves with 1 teaspoon of honey and have it daily in the morning. You can also chew two to three basil leaves in order to remove the stones from the urinary tract.
Watermelon Juice Helps Flush Out Kidney Stones
The water and potassium content present in watermelon are essential nutrients for a healthy kidney. It helps in regulating and maintaining the level of acid present in the urine. Eating watermelon or drinking its juice every day will help in flushing out stones from the kidney.
Figs for Dissolving Kidney Stones
Boil two figs in a cup of water and drink it on an empty stomach early in the morning.
Celery Can Prevent Kidney Stone Formation
Regular intake of celery helps in clearing the toxins that cause the formation of stones in the kidney.
Tomato Juice Helps Dissolve Mineral Salt Deposits
Drink a glass of tomato juice with a pinch of salt and pepper every morning. This helps dissolve the mineral salt deposits in the kidney.
Whole Wheat Bread Helps Lower Risk of Kidney Stones
Whole wheat bread is a rich source of fiber, nutrients and proteins along with magnesium. Having two to three slices of whole wheat bread daily will help a lot in lowering the risk of kidney stone.
Kidney Beans - Natural Remedy for Kidney Stones:
Kidney beans are another effective remedy for treating kidney stones or any kind of bladder problems. You can simply remove the seeds from the pods and slice the pods in the water; allow the water to boil on low flame for an hour until the pods become soft and tender. Strain the liquid and leave till it cools. Drink it several times throughout the day to get relief from kidney stones.
Drinking Water Helps Prevent Kidney Stones
Drinking plenty of water daily will produce clear urine each time you urinate. This will eventually help the kidney stones to pass.
Citric Fruit Juices - Kidney Cleansing Drink
Orange and lemon juice contain citric acid that helps break down the calcium-based kidney stones. Drink two to three glasses of citric fruit juice daily.This will help increase the volume of urination, which is really good for those having kidney stones.
Advertisement
Kidney friendly Diet
A proper diet is essential in keeping the kidney healthy and prevent the formation of kidney stones. Drinking plenty of water and other fluids or liquids daily will help prevent most types of kidney stones. Consuming too much of calcium-rich foods such as spinach, beet, cauliflower, carrots, almonds, sweet breads, coconut, turnip, bengal gram, peas, whole-wheat flour and organ meats like liver and kidney can lead to kidney stones.
One should also know to choose a diet that is low in salt and animal proteins. Keep away from condiments such as pickle, alcohol drinks, sauce, cucumber, radish, tomato, asparagus, onion, cabbage, meat and gravies as well as carbonated water.