What are Lice?
Lice (singularly called louse) are tiny grey-brown insects that live on people’s scalps. It thrives by sucking the blood from the scalp. Their eggs known as nits can be found glued to the base of the hair strands. The nits hatch after 7 to 10 days. The size of a matured louse is between 2 to 4 mm long. Lice are found only in human beings. Although harmless, they can make your head feel itchy. Lice infestation is commonly found in school children and among people who work together in large numbers.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Lice
Lice spread through close head-to-head contact
Sharing of combs, brushes etc.
Home Remedies for Lice
Tip 1:
Make a mixture with 1 teaspoon lime juice and 1 teaspoon garlic paste. Apply on scalp. Leave for half hour and wash.
Tip 2:
Grind 8-10 almonds along with 2-3 teaspoons of limejuice. Apply on hair, leave for 1/2 an hour and wash.
Tip 3:
Mix 3 tablespoons of oil (olive, coconut, or sesame) and a teaspoon of tea tree oil together in a bowl and apply to the hair, leave for 30-45 minutes and shampoo your hair.
Advertisement
Tip 4:
Prepare a strong herbal mixture using dried thyme leaves and flowers. Use this mixture as a spray or rinse onto hair while combing with a nit comb several times a day.
Tip 5:
Vinegar helps dissolve the bodies of dead nits. Rinse your hair thoroughly with apple cider vinegar before and after shampooing your hair.
Tip 6:
Salt can help remove head lice through desiccation. Mix one-quarter cup of salt and one-quarter cup of vinegar thoroughly. Gently spray the mixture onto your hair till it becomes slightly wet. Use a shower cap to cover your head, leave it for about two hours. Then wash and shampoo your hair.
Tip 7:
Apply a layer of petroleum jelly to the scalp before going to bed. Cover your head with a shower cap and leave it on overnight. Use a baby oil to remove the petroleum jelly in the morning, and then comb your hair thoroughly to remove the Lice.
Tip 8:
Mayonnaise has properties that suffocate live head lice. Apply mayonnaise over the scalp and cover your hair with a shower cap or towel, leave it for about one to two hours. Shampoo your hair and then comb it thoroughly to remove the dead lice.