What is Mouth ulcer?
A mouth ulcer is a painful sore in the mouth. It appears on the tongue, the lips, and the gums or inside the cheeks. The first sign of the sore may be a tingling, burning sensation inside the mouth. They can occur either singly or in clusters. They are usually white or yellow in color, surrounded by red halos. Usually, they heal within 7 to 10 days (1✔



). There are 3 types of ulcers:
Minor ulcers
Large ulcers
Herpetiform ulcers (where one can have up to 100 very small painful ulcers)
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Mouth ulcers
Nutritional deficiencies such as iron, vitamins, especially B12 and C
Poor dental hygiene
Food allergies
Stress
Infections, particularly herpes simplex
Biting the cheek
Hormonal imbalance
Bowel disease
Skin disease
Advertisement
Disclaimer:
The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Mouth Ulcers
Tip 1:
Grate some fresh coconut. Extract the milk and gargle with this 3-4 times a day. According to a study, coconut milk enhanced the healing of oral ulcers and can be used as a safe and natural alternative as an ulcer healing agent (2✔



).
Tip 2:
Boil 2 cups of water. Add 1 cup fenugreek leaves and remove. Cover and keep for some time. Strain the water and gargle 2-3 times a day (3✔



).
Tip 3:
Boil a handful of freshly chopped and slightly crushed coriander leaves in 1 litre of water. Allow it to boil till it reduces to one fourth of its volume, remove it from the flame and allow it to cool, then strain the leaves. One ounce of this extract can be used for gargling in the morning and evening till you see any significant improvements (4✔



).
Tip 4:
A research article says that basil has anti-inflammatory properties which may help in resolving inflammation. Chew on 5-6 tulsi (holy basil leaves) and sip some water. Repeat 5-6 times a day (5✔



).
Tip 5:
Mix 7 parts of sugar candy (mishri) with 1 part of camphor. Apply on the blister.
Tip 6:
According to a study, turmeric significantly reduced the size of sores. Mix a pinch of turmeric powder to 1 tsp of water and apply (6✔



).
Tip 7:
According to a research, licorice is found to be effective in healing mouth ulcers. Rinse your mouth with a paste made of licorice and water to treat mouth ulcers (7✔



).