What is Nosebleed?
Nosebleed, also known as Epistaxis, is a common occurrence, which can be treated at home with simple firstaid measures. Nosebleed is usually triggered by nose picking or infection of the mucous membrane that causes dryness. Even a blow to the nose may be a reason for a nosebleed. The presence of many blood vessels in the nose makes it more vulnerable to bleed even if slightly damaged. Most nosebleeds occur in the front part of the nose and stop within a few minutes. Most nosebleeds are not serious.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Nosebleed
Nose picking
Nose injury
Cold or flu
Inserting small objects
Allergies
Nasal tumor
Dry nasal passages
Nasal infection
Sinusitis
Dry Climate
Advertisement
Home Remedies for Nosebleeds
Tip 1:
Dab a cotton ball in apple cider vinegar and place in your nostril. This helps in reducing the flow of blood from your nose.
Tip 2:
Apply an ice pack or cold compress across the bridge of your nose for at least 5 to 10 minutes. This will help constrict blood vessels and reduce the bleeding and swelling of your nose.
Tip 3:
Firmly press your nostril using your thumb and forefinger for five to ten minutes, and breathe through your mouth. This may help stop your nosebleed.
Tip 4:
In case of a minor nosebleed, sit up straight with your head tilted slightly forward to prevent blood running down your throat. Swallowing blood can cause nausea.
Tip 5:
Vitamin K deficiency can cause nosebleeds. Hence, eat lots of vitamin K rich foods such as dark green leafy vegetables to help prevent future nosebleeds.
Tip 6:
Apply a light coating of moisturizing ointments such as Vaseline or an antiseptic nasal cream inside your nose to prevent from a nosebleed. Do not blow your nose or put anything else inside for at least 12 hours after the bleeding has stopped.
Tip 7:
Include some vitamin C and flavonoid rich foods in your diet such as apples, garlic, citrus fruit, watermelon and onions. These help strengthen the capillaries, making them less prone to bleeding.
Tip 8:
Dryness inside the nasal membranes can lead to a nosebleed. Therefore drink plenty of water daily or make a mixture of normal water with a bit of salt and put some few drops in your nose to moisten the inner lining of the nasal passages.