What is Obesity?
Obesity is a condition of excessive body fat for a given height and gender. The intake of the calories must harmonize with the output of work done physically, to burn up the calories. Else the unused calories get stored up in the body as fat. The calorie requirement differs for each individual according to the pattern of work he undertakes. Eating just what the body needs followed by regular exercise is the only solution to deal obesity.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Obesity
Lifestyle
Excess calorie intake
Quality of diet (too much of fatty foods)
Spacing of meals (eating very often)
Hormones
Metabolism
Genetic factors
Home Remedies for Obesity
Tip 1:
Vegetables such as tomatoes, carrots and dark green leafy vegetables are low-calorie foods that are good for your health. Therefore, include some vegetables salad and fruits in your daily diet to keep you full and satisfied throughout the day.
Tip 2:
Make a mixture of 1 teaspoon of honey and lemon juice in a glass of warm water, mix well and have this mixture daily in the morning.
Advertisement
Tip 3:
Green tea is an effective remedy for weight loss. Add 2-3 cups of green tea everyday to your daily routine to combat obesity.
Tip 4:
Exercise plays a key role in maintaining a healthy body. Lack of exercise can lead to overweight and obesity. Exercising burns up the extra fats in the body and will keep your body flexible, energetic and healthy, hence start doing some exercise daily for a fit and healthy body.
Tip 5:
Apple cider vinegar is another effective remedy that helps to break down the fats in your body. Make a mixture of 1 teaspoons of apple cider vinegar with 1 teaspoon of lemon juice in a glass of warm water and drink daily on an empty stomach for two to three months.
Tip 6:
Mint leaves are another useful remedy that aid in losing weight. Prepare a peppermint tea and consume twice a day daily. You can also chew some raw mint leaves during your meals.
Tip 7:
Drink at least 8-10 glasses of warm water daily to make sure that your body is getting enough water. Drinking warm water will help shed those extra flabs in your body by burning extra calories several times a day, hence it can help you lose weight.
Tip 8:
Cayenne pepper or red chilli is a spicy food that works wonders for weight loss. It contains capsaicin that stimulates your body to burn calories and control your appetite. Use cayenne pepper for cooking purposes by mixing with other spices such as ginger, mustard seeds, black pepper and so on.