What is Optic Neuritis?
Optic neuritis refers to the swelling of the optic nerve, the bundle of nerve fibers that transmits signals from the eye to the brain. It is also known as retrobulbar neuritis.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Development of optic neuritis is a serious condition leading to impairment of vision and, in some cases, loss of vision. Individuals experience pain, impairment in color vision as well as impaired assessment of depth in vision.
Optic neuritis may be temporary, where vision is restored after treatment. Steroids are prescribed for faster recovery of vision (1✔



).
Types of Optic Neuritis
Typical - Optic neuritis that develops as a result of multiple sclerosis and is independent of steroids for treatment.
Atypical - Optic neuritis that develops as a result of other conditions and is steroid- dependent for treatment (2✔



).
Advertisement
Common Causes of Optic Neuritis
In optic neuritis, the immune system of an individual may attack the myelin sheath covering the optic nerve, thus damaging the transfer of signals from the optic nerve to the brain. There are many causes of optic neuritis. They are as follows (3✔



):
Autoimmune disorders - Systemic lupus erythematosus and sarcoidosis
Multiple sclerosis - This condition is a common cause of optic neuritis. When the immune system attacks the myelin sheath surrounding the brain and the spine, it results in multiple sclerosis. The frequency of developing multiple sclerosis is increased with an incidence of optic neuritis.
Some forms of medications - Drugs such as ethambutol that is used to treat tuberculosis can cause optic neuritis. Other drugs such as quinine and amiodarone can cause optic neuritis.
Deficiency in nutrients - Vitamin B12 deficiency can be a contributing factor for optic neuritis. Vitamin B12 deficiency is mostly found among vegetarians (4✔



).
Genetic disorders - Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy is a genetic disorder. According to a study, it is found to affect males more than females (5✔



).
Neuromyelitis optica - It is also called as Devic’s syndrome and it is characterized by both optic neuritis and myelitis (Long segments of spinal cord inflammation). It is an uncommon antibody mediated disease of the central nervous system (6✔



, 7✔



). In this condition, the optic neuritis that occurs is more severe. The optic nerve is severely damaged in neuromyelitis optica. The optic nerve fiber and the nerve fibers of the spine are affected. The nerves in the brain, however, remain unaffected.
Trauma
Infiltrative disorders - lymphoma
Bacterial and viral infections - Hepatitis B, HIV, cytomegalovirus, measles, mumps, Lyme disease, syphilis
Tuberculosis
Paraneoplastic disorders
Radiation therapy
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Optic Neuritis
Epsom salts - Take a bath thrice a week with epsom salts, which may help in reducing inflammation of the nerves.
Vegetable juice - Spinach, beet, and carrot juice reduce the inflammation of the nerves and resulting pain.
Vitamin B Supplements - Vitamin B2, vitamin B12, and pantothenic acid enhance and protect the function of the inflamed nerves. According to a study, timely identification and replacement of this vitamin can help in reversing optic neuropathy (4✔



). They act as antioxidants.
Other Nutrients - Omega-3 fatty acids (8✔



), bilberry, alpha-lipoic acid (9✔



), and taurine have also been shown, in research, to be effective in reducing inflammation of the nerves.
Advertisement
Exercise - Moderate walking for 20 minutes a day enhances the release and distribution of hormones which may help in reducing nerve inflammation.
Diet - Avoid coffee, tea, canned meat, canned fish, cereal, and white bread during painful episodes of neuritis.