What is Peptic Ulcer (stomach ulcer)?
Peptic ulcer is an open sore or erosion on the gastrointestinal tract that is painful. It develops when hydrochloric acid in the digestive fluids and the enzyme pepsin in the stomach damage the gastrointestinal tract. An ulcer in the stomach is called gastric ulcer and in the duodenum is called a duodenal ulcer. The gastric and duodenal ulcers together are referred to as peptic ulcers.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Peptic Ulcers
Bacterial infection (Helicobacter pylori)
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs like aspirin, ibuprofen (NSAIDs)
Smoking, stress, etc., increase susceptibility
Immune Abnormalities
Alcoholism
Home Remedies for Peptic Ulcers
Tip 1:
Fenugreek leaves contain compounds that can heal the ulcer. Boil 1 cup of fenugreek leaves and add a pinch of salt to it. Drink this twice a day.
Tip 2:
Drinking raw cabbage juice is very effective for treating stomach ulcer. Consume fresh cabbage juice daily before your bedtime. This will help strengthen the stomach lining and heal the ulcer.
Advertisement
Tip 3:
Bananas contain an antibacterial substance that help slow down the growth of ulcer in the stomach. Hence eat a banana every day after your breakfast.
Tip 4:
Honey has natural healing properties that work wonders for treating stomach ulcer. Take a tablespoon of honey daily before your breakfast or have it any time of the day with food like wheat bread. This will help reduce stomach inflammation and keep away other stomach diseases.
Tip 5:
A clove of garlic is highly recommended for stomach ulcer. Eat 2- 3 cloves of garlic a day during your daily meals to ease the inflammation in the stomach.
Tip 6:
Powder the bark of the slippery elm and add to a cup of warm water, mix well and drink the mixture three times a day. The bark of slippery elm has been used to soothe the mucus membranes that line the stomach and the duodenum.
Tip 7:
Coconut oil has been used widely as a natural ingredient for treating various disturbances in the stomach. It has an anti-bacterial property that kills bacteria that cause ulcers.