What are Piles?
Piles, otherwise known as hemorrhoids, are enlarged, painful veins in the rectum. It refers to a condition in which the veins around the anus or lower rectum are swollen and inflamed. Piles arise from the increased pressure of internal or external veins around the anal canal. Piles are both internal and external. Internal hemorrhoids, unless they are severe, cannot be seen or felt. External hemorrhoids can be seen on the outside of the anus. Although uncomfortable and embarrassing, it is not normally a serious condition.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Piles
Low fiber diet
Pregnancy
Aging
Hereditary
Chronic constipation
Anal intercourse
Home Remedies for Piles
Black Cumin Seeds Reduce Pain Associated with Piles
Take 1 tbsp of black cumin seeds (shah jeera), roast and mix with 1 tbsp of unroasted black cumin seeds and powder both together. Take 1/2 a tsp of this ground water with a glass of water once a day to get rid of piles.
Radish Juice Soothes Digestive System
Radish juice taken in the morning and night is one of the best home remedies for piles. Start with 1/4 a cup and increase to 1/2 a cup gradually over a period of 1 month. Local application of radish paste mixed with honey can help ease pain.
Figs: Effective Remedy for Piles
Wash 3-4 figs. Soak in a glass of water overnight. Eat them first thing in the morning. Again repeat in the night. Figs are one of the amazing ayurvedic treatments for piles.
Advertisement
Ripe Bananas Relieve Hemorrhoid Pain
Boil 1 ripe banana in 1 cup of milk, mash well. Having this mixture at least 3 - 4 times a day helps ease pain associated with piles.
Bitter Gourd Juice to Treat Piles
Crush bitter gourd leaves and extract the juice. Mix 3 tsp of the extract in 1 glass of buttermilk, and drink on an empty stomach every morning, for a month to treat piles.
Buttermilk - Home Remedy for Piles
Drink a glass of buttermilk with 1/4 tsp of carom seed powder (ajwain) and a pinch of salt. Buttermilk is advised as a part of the regular diet for people with piles.