What is Pyorrhea?
Pyorrhea is a condition characterized by bleeding gums. Pyorrhea is the cause of an attack of a bacillus upon the gums and teeth. The bacillus thrives and multiplies on the deposits of food that gets accumulated within the gaps of the teeth. The accumulation leads to lack of proper exercise of the gums, which lowers the resistance of the gums. Good oral hygiene, proper brushing of teeth, flossing and scaling are effective ways to prevent pyorrhea.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Pyorrhea
Improper brushing habits
Poor oral hygiene
Improper nutrition
Lack of resistance of the gums
Home Remedies for Pyorrhea
Tip 1
Chewing guava leaves or unripe guava helps in curing bleeding from gums and keeps the teeth healthy. It acts as a teeth tonic due to the high amount of vitamin C.
Tip 2
Drinking 1 cup of spinach juice mixed with 1 cup of carrot juice is another effective remedy for the prevention and treatment of pyorrhea.
Tip 3
An unripe papaya is a rich source of vitamin C, which helps in keeping the teeth healthy and stops bleeding from gums.
Tip 4
Ripe bananas have essential minerals that help in stopping bleeding and treating the pain.
Advertisement
Tip 5
Take an orange or lemon peel and rub on the gums for 5 minutes. Repeat this two times a day to stop the bleeding.
Tip 6
Take 2 teaspoon of crushed pomegranate, add ½ teaspoon of pepper and 1 teaspoon of salt. Mix them well and apply on the gums and leave for 5 minutes and wash with warm water.
Tip 7
After brushing take some mustard oil and add a pinch of salt to it. Rub this mixture on the gums and leave for 5 minutes.
Tip 8
Boil 4 to 5 of cinnamon bark pieces in a vessel of water for about half an hour. Cool down the fluid a bit and strain, and use it for gargling. This is an effective way in treating pyorrhea.
Tip 9
Take a spoonful of pure ghee, add some camphor and mix well to form a paste. Apply this paste over the gums two times a day.
Tip 10
Grind some pepper till it forms a fine powder and add some salt to it. Massage this mixture onto the gums several times a day to cure pyorrhea.