What is Ringworm?
Ringworm is a general term for a common fungus infection on the skin. In scientific terms it is called ‘Dermatophytosis’. The infection is called ringworm, as it appears as round or ring-like in shape. Pets, such as dogs or cats, may be a source of transmitting the disease to humans. Although ringworms are common among the children, anybody can be affected by them (1✔



).
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Ringworm
Dermatophytosis is caused by a fungi that live on the dead tissues of skin, hair and nails. It can be transmitted through
Skin contact with another person
By using unwashed clothes or sharing combs of infected people
Pets especially when grooming.
Soil that contains the fungi.
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Ringworm
Here are some home remedies that may help in reducing the infection.
Tip 1:
Rub a slice of freshly cut raw papaya on the patch.
Tip 2:
Make a powder with mustard seeds. Add some water to the powder and make a paste. Apply on the patch, it may result in significant reduction in the lesions.
Advertisement
Tip 3:
The juice of basil leaves (tulsi) to be applied on the patch 2-3 times a day.
Tip 4:
Garlic is an anti-fungal food that has been used for innumerable health conditions including ringworms. Smash few pieces of garlic and rub it on the affected area daily till the patch heals and disappears.
Tip 5:
Turmeric has great natural antibiotic qualities. Extract the juice from fresh turmeric and apply to the areas that are affected until you see the problem go away.
Tip 6:
Vinegar and salt are a good combination for treating ringworms. Make a paste of vinegar and salt, apply it directly onto the ringworm patch and leave it for 5 minutes. Continue this method daily till the patch heals completely.
Tip 7:
According to a study, the compounds isolated from Neem is found to be beneficiary in treating ringworms. Apply neem oil directly to wound for 3 or 4 days continuously to stop fungal infection (2✔



).
Advertisement
Tip 8:
Lavender oil is yet another substance with powerful anti-fungal effects. Apply lavender oil onto the affected area daily, the oil does not simply stop fungi from developing, but actually kills the infection. According to research on the effect of lavender essential oils on ring worm, it has a significant effect in inhibiting dermatophytosis (3✔



).
Tip 9:
Tea tree oil helps in treating cuts, burns and various fungal infections like ringworms. Add several drops of tea tree oil in sterile cotton and apply it directly to the ringworm-infected area. Repeat this process three times a day, which may result in significant improvement in lesions (4✔



).
Tip 10:
According to a research, the extract of the bark of the plant Calotris Gigantea (purple crown flower) and Calotris procera (white crown flower) has some antifungal properties. The milk from the plant can be applied for some soothing effect on the lesions (5✔



).
Tip 11:
Coconut oil is a common remedy for ringworm lesions. Apply the oil directly to the infected area and it may reduce the itching.
Tip 12:
Senna alata is a medicinal plant which is also an ornamental flowering plant. It is commonly called using different names, such as ‘Candle bush’, ‘Christmas candles’, ‘Empress candle plant’. According to a study, Senna alata has some anti-fungal properties. The essential oil extracted from this plant can be used in treating dermatophytosis (6✔



).
Tip 13:
According to one study, a mixture of honey, olive oil, and bees wax helped some people treat fungal infections on their skin. Mixture of honey, olive oil and bees wax can be applied on the ringworm wounds. This may help in reducing the lesions when applied for at least 3 to 4 weeks (7✔



).