Almost everyone gets a sore throat at one time or another. Children, especially, get it more often than adults. Sore throat is most commonly caused by a virus, and to a lesser extent by bacteria, which then can develop into a serious disease. But how would you know whether it is a viral infection or a bacterial one? If yours lasts more than a few days or if it is accompanied by fever, nausea, or abdominal pain, it is advisable to see a doctor and get treated. In other cases, sore throat heals soon enough without complications and can be easily treated with ingredients from your kitchen.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
What is Sore Throat?
A sore throat is a painful feeling in the throat aggravated by swallowing. Bacteria or virus causes sore throat, medically known as pharyngitis. Most often it will be a symptom of an underlying illness like cold, flu, mumps, tonsillitis, etc. Sore throat is named, depending on the area where the pain is, like:
Pharyngitis
Epiglottitis
Laryngitis
Tonsillitis
Common Causes of Sore Throat
Viral infection
Bacterial infection
Fungal infection
Smoking
Shouting
Allergies
Advertisement
Home Remedies for Sore Throat
For quick relief from a sore throat, you can try the following home remedies:
1. Drink ginger tea. You can prepare ginger tea by adding a one-inch long crushed piece of ginger in the water and boiling it for two to three minutes, and then preparing the tea as you normally would.
2. Warm chamomile tea also relieves throat pain as it fights inflammation. Steep two tea bags in one cup of boiling water and sip the tea. You can add honey if you want it sweet.
3. Inhale fragrances of essential oils. Use any essential oils you have at home. It could be lavender, thyme, sandalwood, eucalyptus, etc.
4. Gargle with a mixture of water, salt, and turmeric. This is a very effective home remedy for relieving pain, plus, the ingredients are available 24x7 in all kitchens. Add one teaspoon of salt and a pinch of turmeric to 8 ounces of warm water. The mixture should not be hot or you might scald your throat.
5. Boil tulsi / basil leaves in water and drink that water. Alternatively, gargle with that water while it’s warm.
6. Sip a decoction of Indian spices. It’s not as weird as it sounds. Just grind a teaspoon each of fennel seeds, black peppercorn, cumin seeds, coriander seeds, and dry ginger (sauth), mix them and simmer the powder in 2 cups of boiling water for 5 to 6 minutes. Strain and drink the solution while it’s still hot/warm.
7. Sip a cup of warm water containing a tablespoon each of honey and lemon juice. It’s a great remedy for sore throats.
8. If you don’t have any of the spices mentioned above, just a tablespoon of honey can also serve the purpose to a certain extent. After all, honey is a natural antibiotic. However, honey is best avoided for children below two years of age.
9. Suck on hard candy. It can soothe your throat by keeping it moist. It can be a choking hazard for young children, so avoid giving lozenges to kids below age four.
10. Eating can be difficult if you have a sore throat. Hot and sour chicken soup will not only soothe the pain but will also ensure that you're getting the nutrients to fight inflammation.
11. An age-old remedy for sore throat is steam inhaling. Heat a pot of water, lean over the pot. Place a towel over your head so as to tent the steam and keep the steam in. Breathe in the steam with your mouth too. Take adequate precautions to protect yourself from the pot and the water.
Rest a lot and drink plenty of fluids. It will keep your throat moist and soothe your throat. Moreover, fluids can wash away any bacteria lingering in your throat. And, very importantly, DON’T smoke or use tobacco products.