What are Spectacle Marks?
People who use spectacles on a regular basis often notice small indentations or darkened skin where their skin comes in contact with the flexible clips of their spectacles. Some people try to switch to contact lenses as a temporary measure but in many cases the marks remain. It is important to understand the exact cause of these marks in order to prevent them (1✔



).
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Causes of Spectacle Marks
The darkened patches of skin are hyperpigmentation marks caused by the friction of your spectacles’ nose pads against your skin. If the nose pads are too tight, the constant pressure they exert on the specific points of contact with your skin can cause small indentations in your skin. An increase in body weight can also cause this problem as even a minimal layer of fat deposits under the skin can cause the frame to sit tighter on one’s face. People who use heavy or ill-fitting frames are more likely to face this problem (2✔



).
Disclaimer: The home remedies suggested here are not a substitute for treatment by doctors. It is highly advisable to seek an expert’s opinion. All the remedies listed here may not be suitable for everyone. It is recommended to check for allergies or do a patch test before using the remedy.
Home Remedies for Spectacle Marks
Here are some home remedies that you can use to help lighten the marks
Potato Juice
Potato juice has mild bleaching properties so you can use fresh potato juice to lighten the hyperpigmentation marks left by your spectacles. The simplest way to do this is to cut a thin slice of potato in half and apply the pieces to the marks. Allow it to remain in place for at least 20 minutes before taking them off and rinsing your face with cold water.
Tomato and Cucumber Paste
Puree a small piece of cucumber along with a slightly larger piece of tomato and apply the paste to your nose. Tomatoes contain over 10 types of natural acids including citric acid and oxalic acid which may help dissolve the upper layers of dead skin. Cucumber juice has a soothing effect so this natural remedy for spectacles marks may help soothe your skin.
Advertisement
Fresh Strawberry Juice
Strawberry juice contains ellagic acid, which works as an antioxidant and is effective at skin lightening. Apply a small amount of fresh strawberry juice to the hyper-pigmented scars to make them fade quickly. If you don’t have strawberries, you can use cherries or pomegranates instead as they contain ellagic acid too. This remedy may work for some people. People who are allergic to strawberries are advised not to use it.
Honey and Oats with Milk 
Honey has a wide assortment of amino acids while milk contains lactic acid and oats have soothing and cleansing properties. This is why a mixture of milk, honey and oats help to reduce hyper-pigmentation marks. The best way to use this remedy is to apply the paste on to the marks and then slowly and gently massage it into your skin. Allow it to dry completely before rinsing your face with lukewarm water.
Aloe Vera
Aloe Vera gel contains two hormones called Auxins and Gibberellins which aid wound healing and have anti-inflammatory properties. Aloe gel also contains vitamins A, C and E which are antioxidants that prevent damage caused by free radicals. It also contains enzymes that reduce inflammation when applied topically. Apply a thin layer of Aloe Vera gel to the affected areas and allow it to dry before wearing your spectacles. It would be best to apply the gel just before you go to bed and don’t wash it off until the next morning. Try it on to a small patch on your skin, it would be wise to try different remedies until you find one that suits your skin type.
Apple Cider Vinegar
Apple cider vinegar is a mild acid which is why it is often recommended as a facial toner. It also provides a clearer and even skin surface which is why it may act as a remedy for hyper pigmented or raised scars caused by wearing spectacles. Mix equal parts of apple cider vinegar and warm water and rinse your face with this solution as soon as you get home. Apply a little bit of the solution to your fingertips and massage the indented scars on your nose for a few minutes before rinsing your face with cold water.
Lemon Juice Mint
Lemon juice has a high Vitamin C content which is a potent antioxidant that is commonly used in dermatological topical preparations as it reduces hyperpigmentation as well as photo aging damage. Crush a few mint leaves along with a teaspoon of fresh lemon juice and apply this liquid to the hyper-pigmented areas on your nose to soothe your skin as well as reduce the severity of your scars.
Almond Milk and Rose Water
Almonds are a good source of Vitamins E and R, which help to even out skin tone and complexion. Soak a handful of almonds in a bowl of water overnight and crush them the next morning along with a little rose water. Apply this liquid to either side of your nose before you put on your spectacles as it may help to reduce the scars as well as prevent them from getting worse.
Advertisement
Olive Oil and Cocoa Butter
Olive oil and cocoa butter are excellent emollients and will smooth and soften your skin. Take a pea sized amount of cocoa butter and add about 2 drops of olive oil to it. Mix this thoroughly before applying it to the scars on your nose.
Lavender Oil with Sea Salt
Add a few drops of lavender essential oil to a pinch of salt so that it forms a paste. Massage the scars gently with this paste and then rinse your face with warm water. Lavender oil may help to diminish scars while salt works as a natural exfoliator.