What is Toothache?
Toothache or tooth pain is caused when the nerve root of the tooth is irritated. Each tooth has a dental pulp in the middle, which is very soft and spongy, containing lots of sensitive nerves and blood vessels. Inflammation of the pulp inside the tooth causes toothache. It can be caused due to dental decay or dental cavities. Drinking something hot or cold may cause toothache, as it touches the nerve pulp.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Toothache
Dental decay
Dental cavities
Swelling of the pulp
Tooth infection
Broken tooth
Exposed tooth root
Crack in the tooth
Remedies for Toothache
Tip 1:
Garlic has antibiotics and other medicinal properties that can be very effective for treating toothache. Crush a clove of garlic with rock salt and apply on the affected tooth.
Tip 2:
Place a piece of raw onion on the tooth. This will help in killing the germs in the affected tooth and offer relief from pain.
Tip 3:
A clove or clove oil applied on the tooth will help. Dab a cotton ball in clove oil and place the cotton on the affected tooth and gently bite down. Clove oil has natural properties that help relieve tooth pain and prevents future cavities and bad breath.
Advertisement
Tip 4:
Boil 5-6 cloves and 2-inch bark of a Margosa tree (Neem) in 1 cup of water. Strain and bottle. Store this in the fridge. Smear this decoction on the affected tooth.
Tip 5:
Salt water helps cleanse the area around the tooth and draws out some of the fluid that causes swelling. Stir a teaspoon of salt in warm water and rinse your mouth thoroughly for about 30 seconds before you spit it out. Repeat this treatment as often as needed.
Tip 6:
Tea tree oil is a natural ingredient that can help to provide toothache relief. Soak a cotton ball in the tea tree oil and place in the affected tooth or add a few drops of tea tree oil to a glass of warm water and rinse your mouth thoroughly before you spit it out.
Tip 7:
Mix equal amounts of pepper, salt and few drops of water to form a paste. Apply this paste on the affected area. This will help relieve the toothache.
Tip 8:
Cinnamon mixed with honey can be of great use for treating toothache. Mix 1 teaspoon of cinnamon powder with 5 teaspoons of honey to make a paste. Apply this paste directly onto the affected tooth. Continue applying the paste to the affected tooth two to three times a day until the pain is gone.