What is Urinary Tract Infection?
UTI, short for urinary tract infection, is the second most common complaint patients from around the world take to their doctors. Though this condition is most commonly observed in women, men too are prone.
Embarrassing, unpredictable and troubling, this problem tends to stay on your mind for a bit, and if that’s the case with you too, wait no more. Read on to find out more about what could be possibly triggering your condition, how you can detect it more easily, and simple home remedies that could help you deal better with it.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
What are the Causes of Urinary Tract Infection?
Certain health conditions like diabetes, menopause and even pregnancy can trigger urinary tract infection. Most commonly, it occurs as a result of bacterial invasion into the urinary tract, which is common during sexual activity with an infected person. It is believed that holding urine for too long in the bladder can also cause urinary tract infection.
Symptoms of Urinary Tract Infection- People suffering from a urinary tract infection most commonly face symptoms such as-
Increased frequency of urination
Passing small amount of urine while sneezing, coughing or laughing.
Fever
Dizziness
Nausea
Vomiting
Mild to moderate pain in the abdomen
Noticeable change in the color of urine
Burning sensation while urinating
Pain while urinating
Advertisement
Home Remedies to Curb Urinary Tract Infection-
You may tend to ignore UTI, but not treating this condition can cause kidney damage. To make things easier, we’ve listed down a few simple home remedies to treat urinary tract infection.
Yogurt Goodness- People suffering from frequent, recurring UTI can benefit a lot by using yogurt as a home remedy. The lactobacilli-bacteria present in the yogurt, are thought to reduce the occurrence of urinary tract infection.
Blueberry Power-With their extraordinary bacteria-inhibiting properties, blueberries are an excellent and effective home remedy for urinary tract infections. Adding more blueberries to your diet as a juice or a smoothie can help reduce bacterial growth in the urinary tract.
Water Splash- Water is the biggest healer; and if you doubt it, talk to a person who has used hydrotherapy and experienced its benefits. Drinking more water than usual while suffering from UTI can help increase the frequency of urination, thereby flushing away the infection-causing bacteria with every visit to the bathroom, and delaying their breeding.
Tropical Pineapple- This tropical fruit does much more than just looking good in your fruit salads. Rich with the enzyme bromelain, pineapples are an effective natural treatment for urinary tract infections. Best of all, this fruit is sweet, versatile and easy. You can’t go wrong with it.
Cranberry to the Rescue- Cranberry, belonging to the same plant family as blueberry, is your single one-stop-solution for a urinary tract infection. A number of studies have confirmed its use as an effective treatment for UTI. It works in a way similar to blueberries-doesn’t allow the infection-causing bacteria to breed, presenting a mild antibiotic effect.
Pure cranberry juice can be a bit bitter on your taste buds; try adding a couple of other fruits that you love for a mixed fruit juice.
Vital Vitamin C- People suffering from recurrent urinary tract infections can try Vitamin C supplements or adding more vitamin C rich foods like amla, lemon and oranges to their diet. Vitamin C creates an acidic environment in the bladder and the urinary tract, which doesn’t allow potentially-harmful bacteria to enter. Most practitioners prescribe 5,000mg of vitamin C a day for patients having recurrent UTI.
Vinegar Power- Vinegar too is thought to possess the ability to curb frequent UTIs. It works by alkalinizing the environment of the bladder and the urinary tract, making the pH intolerable for the infection-causing bacteria to breed in. Just add a couple of teaspoons of vinegar to a glass of warm water, and gulp it down.
Baking Soda- Baking soda as a home remedy may not be the most edible treatment, but it does have extraordinary benefits in relieving burning and reducing the frequency of urination for a person suffering from UTI. Mix 1tsp of baking soda to a cup of cold water; a simple home remedy that works like magic!