What is Vertigo?
Vertigo is a disease, which occurs due to the patient having problems in the posterior semicircular canals of the inner ear-medically known as the vestibular labyrinth area of the ear. Patients suffering from vertigo will experience an abnormal sensation that causes them to feel as though their surrounding environment is continuously spinning, whirling or moving. As a result of this, the vertigo patient suffers from loss of balance or a sensation of nausea that may grow acute.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Vertigo
Due to the free-floating calcium carbonate crystals in the posterior semicircular canals of the inner ear
An infection in the ear for example syphilis
Vision problems
Acute head injury
Cardiac conditions
Brain tumors
Thyroid disease
Anemia
Calcium disorders
Motion sickness
Insufficient blood supply to the brain
High blood pressure
High cholesterol
Diabetes
Dehydration
Medication
Strokes
Surgery
General anesthesia
Advertisement
Home Remedies for Vertigo
Tip 1:
Soak in water - 2 tbsp wheat grain, 1 tsp poppy seeds (khus-khus), 8 almonds, 8 watermelon seeds and make a paste. Heat 1 tsp ghee, fry 2 cloves in this, add to the paste, mix with milk and drink every day for a week.
Tip 2:
Soak 1 tsp of amla (gooseberry) powder in water along with 1 tsp coriander seeds. Leave overnight. Strain and add 1/2 tsp sugar and drink.
Tip 3:
Try to relax your body and make sure you have enough sleep because lack of sleep can aggravate vertigo and cause sudden dizziness and nausea.
Tip 4:
Have a healthy diet that contains vitamins and minerals and sprinkle some lemon peel in your salads.
Tip 5:
High intake of liquids such as juices and water keeps your body hydrated.
Tip 6:
Avoid sudden jerks and movements that lead to imbalance while getting up from the bed.
Tip 7:
Take some ripe strawberries and mix them well with yogurt, have them to relieve problems that cause Vertigo.
Advertisement
Tip 8:
Take a piece of raw ginger and add to your tea or just chew a piece of ginger. It helps to control your blood pressure and reduces headache and nausea.
Tip 9:
Almonds are one of the most nutritious nuts. Grind some almonds and mix it in a glass of warm milk and drink. It will make you feel energetic and healthy and reduce vertigo symptoms.
Tip 10:
Vertigo first begins with nausea and headache. As soon as the symptoms begin, take a bit of salt, black pepper and lemon juice in a glass of warm water and drink to prevent a bout of vertigo.