What is Vomiting?
Vomiting, known medically as emesis and informally as puking or throwing up, is a biological defense mechanism. It is a reflex activity, which refers to the forceful oral expulsion of stomach contents. The actual function of vomiting is to remove toxic or harmful substances from the body after ingestion. However, vomiting is multifactorial in origin and can be caused due to various reasons. Retching is the sustained contraction of the chest and abdominal muscles that accompanies before or during vomiting.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Vomiting
Food poisoning
Gastroenteritis
Spinning too fast on a ride
Surgery
Pregnancy
Certain drugs
Disgusting sights
Disgusting smells
Home Remedies for Vomiting
Tip 1
Heat 2 cardamoms on a dry saucepan. Powder them and add a tablespoon of honey and take frequently.
Advertisement
Tip 2
Try mint tea to get relief from vomiting. Add mint leaves in boiling water. Strain the leaves and serve your tea.
Tip 3
Lemon juice is an effective home treatment for vomiting. Make a mixture of water, 1 teaspoon of lemon juice, ½ teaspoon of sugar and a pinch of baking soda, stir all these ingredients well and drink it. This will immediately give relief from vomiting.
Tip 4
Ginger is another ingredient to cure the problem of vomiting. Ginger is good for your digestive system and helps to block unnecessary secretion inside the stomach that can cause vomiting. So when having pre-signs of vomiting, just have some ginger tea with a little sugar.
Tip 5
If you have just finished a bout of vomiting the smell of vomit and the after taste in your mouth can cause more vomiting. In such cases, make a mixture of 1 teaspoon of vinegar with ½ a cup of water. Mix it well and rinse your mouth with this mixture properly. This will help freshen up your breath.
Tip 6
Rice water helps to reduce vomiting, especially, when it is caused by gastritis. Boil a cup of white rice in 2 cups of water, strain and drink the rice water.
Tip 7
The antiseptic and anesthetic properties of cloves help in digestion and can also cure vomiting. You can chew some raw cloves or you can add it to tea and drink. Another way to use cloves to stop vomiting is by swallowing a mixture of powdered fried cloves and honey.
Tip 8
The medicinal properties of aniseeds can cure vomiting. You can chew aniseed for quick relief. You can also sprinkle roasted aniseed on mild vegetables like carrots or pumpkin.