"Without memory, there is no culture. Without memory, there would be no civilization, no society, no future." - Elie Wiesel
What is Weak Memory?
Poor memory can occur for many different reasons. Many people experience memory lapses. Some memory problems are serious and others are not. Lack of concentration may also be a reason for poor memory. People whose memory is very poor with notable changes in personality and behavior may be suffering from a form of brain disease called dementia. It seriously affects a person's ability to carry out daily activities.
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
Common Causes of Weak Memory
Aging
Lack of concentration
Depression
Anxiety
Alcoholism
Drug abuse
Brain tumors
Certain medications
Seizures
Advertisement
Home Remedies for Weak Memory
Pistachio nuts: Weak memory may be due to thiamine deficiency. Pistachio nuts are rich sources of thiamine. ½ a cup of this weighs 0.54 mg of thiamine content. The RDA (Recommended Daily Allowance) of thiamine for men is 1.5mg and for women it is 1.1 mg for 50 years of age or younger.
Wheat germ: For memory loss of age-related concern, wheat germ is an apt raw material, which is enriched with vitamin E.
Blueberries: Blueberries are antioxidant-rich juicy fruits, which might help in short-term memory improvement.
Carrots: Carrots are good memory boosters as they are a rich source of carotene. Mix carrot juice and apricot juice to make a luscious drink.
Eggs: Eggs have the fatty substance called lecithin, which helps in nourishment of memory nerve cells. This memory booster is also adequately present in soybean and sunflower oils, and available in capsule form in pharmacies. Consuming up to 50-70 mg of this a day enhances memory power.
Advertisement
Rose Mary: Rosemary (Botanical Name-Romarinus Officinalis) is an effective herb for weak memory. Rosemary is an ideal remedy for mental exhaustion and forgetfulness. It can be taken as a tea and drinking once in the morning or twice a day can improve mental acuity.
Okra (ladies finger) vegetable is traditionally used frequently in Asian cuisine because it is considered a good memory booster.