What are White Heads?
Whiteheads are yet another form of acne. They are a type of pimple or small bumps in the skin caused by oil, dead skin cells and/or bacteria.
The clogged pore is closed and the top of the bump appears white in color. They can appear anywhere on your face (nose, forehead, and chin) and/or on your chest, too!
Listen to this Article
Your browser does not support the audio element.
Advertisement
What are the Causes of White Heads?
Whiteheads are commonly seen in people with oily skin and those who undergo hormonal changes such as teenagers or pregnant ladies. It shows up when your pores get clogged. It stems from the sebaceous glands of your skin that naturally produce oil. The sebum secretion ends up getting trapped inside the pores along dirt and other impurities and it becomes a white little pustule. Unlike the blackheads, they aren’t exposed to oxygen.
Advertisement
Here’s a List of the Common Causes of Whiteheads
Hormonal Changes: During puberty, menstruation, pregnancy and menopause, women tend to go through hormonal changes in their bodies. During such times, the amount of sebum secretion is high and it could block the pores and cause whiteheads. That is the reason why women are more prone to it than men.
Medications: Certain kinds of medicines can affect your hormone levels and can trigger acne and whiteheads.
Increase in Androgen Levels: The male sex hormone ‘Androgen’ is present in both genders at different degrees. The rise in level of the hormone in women due to menopause or hormone replacement therapies might trigger whiteheads.
Excessive use of Cosmetics: This could lead to whiteheads since it leaves behind traces which can clog your skin pores.
Poor Hygiene: Improper skin hygiene and skin care such as not washing your face regularly and not getting rid of skin cells via exfoliation could cause clogging of your skin pores, invite bacterial infection and whiteheads.
There are many ways to get rid of these unsightly white additions to your otherwise pretty face. First and foremost tip would be not to pop them. Ever! Doing so would only make things worse. Continue reading for some of the best home remedies that will help you get rid of your whiteheads naturally.
Home Remedies for Removal of White Heads
1. Baking Soda
This kitchen ingredient does wonders not only when it comes to cooking but also to tackle persistent whiteheads. It exfoliates your skin and helps get rid of dead skin cells. It also maintains the pH balance of your skin. Use a clean cotton swab to gently apply a dilute solution of baking soda on the affected areas of your skin. Do not panic if in case you experience a slight tingling sensation.
2. Oatmeal
The most common kitchen ingredient used in beauty treatments and scrubs. It opens your pores and prevents it from clogging. It also absorbs excess oil secretion and serves as an excellent scrub. Make a paste of honey and oatmeal and gently massage it into your skin in circular motions. Leave it for 15 minutes and wash your face. Upon following this regularly, you will get a whitehead free cleansed skin!
Advertisement
3. Lemon Juice
Rich in ascorbic acid, lemon juice can help reduce whiteheads. Extract the juice of a lemon into a small bowl and apply it on the affected areas of your skin using a piece of clean cotton. This can dry up your skin by curbing the excess sebum secretion and this does the magic of reducing whiteheads.
4. Sugar Scrub
Sugar can act as an exfoliator to get rid of dead skin cells. It also prevents clogging up your pores and prevents acne. Make an easy homemade scrub using sugar and a little extra virgin olive oil and massage into your skin. Leave it for some time and wash it off afterwards.
5. Apple Cider Vinegar
Rich in antiseptic and antibacterial properties, apple cider vinegar is a powerhouse of acne remedies. It also helps maintain the pH balance of your skin, making it hard for bacteria to thrive. It is also an astringent and helps remove excess oil from your skin. Dip a clean ball of cotton into a diluted vinegar solution and apply it on the affected areas of your skin. Leave for 10 minutes or overnight and wash your face thoroughly afterwards. In case you feel like your skin is getting a little dry, use a moisturizer.
6. Tea Tree Oil
Rich in antibacterial properties, it kills off the acne causing bacteria. It also acts as an astringent to reduce excess oil on your skin. It removes dead skin cells and fights acne and helps get rid of whiteheads. Dip a clean swab of cotton in a diluted mixture of tea tree oil and apply it on the affected areas of your skin and wash it off afterwards. Alternatively, you can dilute it with aloe vera gel instead of water.
7. Strawberries
Rich in salicylic acid (the most common cure for acne), strawberries can treat whiteheads effectively. Strawberries help get rid of dead skin cells, unblock your pores and prevent them from clogging up. They also protect your skin from harmful ultraviolet rays and sun damage. Blend together a few strawberries and honey and apply the mixture on the affected areas of your skin. Leave it on for around 20 minutes and wash it afterwards. Do this twice a week for best results.
8. Cinnamon
It has antimicrobial properties and skin regenerating properties and has been widely used in beauty regimens. Make a mask by mixing cinnamon, baking soda, and lemon juice. Apply it on your face. Let it dry and then wash it off using lukewarm water. Alternatively, you can use a cinnamon and honey mask. Honey being a naturally available antibiotic, it can prevent the growth of bacteria and wipe out whiteheads.
9. Gram Flour
This is one of the most traditionally used skincare ingredient used for ages. This magnificent flour is renowned for exfoliating and deep cleansing properties. It helps remove dead skin cells and unclog the pores and absorb excess sebum. Make a paste of gram flour and curd. Smear it evenly all over your face, leave it until it dries and wash it afterwards. Repeat this a couple of times a week to see amazing results.
10. Facial Steam
Steaming has many benefits for your skin. It opens up your pores and can give your skin a glow. After a steaming session, you can gently remove the whiteheads using a good exfoliating scrub. Follow this steaming and scrubbing routine for not more than thrice a week.
11. Turmeric Powder & Neem Leaves
Both these ingredients which are known for their antiseptic properties have been used since time immemorial when it comes to skin care. Mix crushed neem leaves and turmeric powder and make a paste adding some water. Now apply this paste all over your face. Once it dries up, wash it off. Follow this treatment everyday to say goodbye to whiteheads.
12. Sandalwood Paste
Renowned for its numerous skin uses, sandalwood paste has been used since ages as a beauty treatment by women across the country. The amazing fragrance and cooling nature of sandalwood serves as an astringent and a soothing toner which absorbs excess sebum and oil from your skin. It not only helps get rid of your whiteheads but also can prevent recurrence. Make a paste of sandalwood powder and rose water and apply it evenly on your face. Let it dry completely and wash it off afterwards. Do this a couple of times during the week for best results.
Try out these simple and easy-to-follow home remedies and say goodbye to whiteheads!